[[page 1]]
preg com
1
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program
(CPSP)
Page updated: March 2024
The Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP) is a benefit of the Medi-Cal
program. The program offers a wide range of services to pregnant Medi-Cal recipients from
the date of conception through 60 days after the month of delivery. CPSP services are not
intended to be provided to inpatients. Recipient and provider participation is voluntary.
CPSP services are in addition to, not a replacement for, the services that are part of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) visit standards.
Note: For assistance in completing claims for CPSP services, refer to the Pregnancy:
Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP) Billing Examples section in this
manual.
Provider Participation
Eligible Providers
Hospital outpatient departments, community clinics, county clinics, individual physicians,
physician groups, licensed midwives, and Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs) are eligible to
provide these services.‹‹ Providers must be actively enrolled in Medi-Cal under an
organizational National Provider Identifier (NPI) and complete an application with the
California Department of Public Health (CDPH) to participate as a CPSP provider. Eligibility
and training information, including a “CPSP Online Training” and “Provider Handbook,” is
available to new CPSP providers and new staff of existing CPSP providers on the CDPH
CPSP website: www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CFH/DMCAH/CPSP.››
Applying to Become a CPSP Provider
‹‹To apply for or receive information regarding the CPSP provider enrollment application
process, providers should visit CDPH’s CPSP website at:
www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CFH/DMCAH/CPSP or email CDPH at:
CPSPProviderEnrollment@cdph.ca.gov.››
[[page 2]]
preg com
2
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: March 2024
List of CPSP Practitioners
Certified or enrolled CPSP providers may employ or contract with any or all of the following
practitioners for the purpose of providing CPSP services:
• Physicians, including general practitioners, family practice physicians, pediatricians, or
obstetrician-gynecologists
• Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs)
• Registered Nurses (RNs)
• Nurse Practitioners (NPs)
• Licensed Vocational Nurses (LVNs)
• Physician Assistants (PAs)
• Health Educators
• Childbirth Educators
• Registered Dieticians
• Comprehensive Perinatal Health Workers
• Social Workers
• Psychologists
• Marriage, Family and Child Counselors
• Licensed Midwives (LMs)
[[page 3]]
preg com
3
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: March 2024
Policies and Reimbursement
Introduction
The following policies apply when providing comprehensive perinatal services:
• Services must be provided by or under the personal supervision of a physician, with
the exception of a CNM or LM as follows:
– ‹‹A CNM or LM who is a Medi-Cal provider is eligible to become an enrolled CPSP
provider without physician supervision.›› For more information on the physician
supervision and billing requirements for CNMs/LMs, refer to the Non-Physician
Medical Practitioners (NMP) section in this manual.
• California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 51179.5, defines personal supervision
as “evaluation, in accordance with protocols, by a licensed physician, of services
performed by others through direct communication, either in person or through
electronic means.” Each provider’s protocols must define how personal supervision by
a physician occurs and is documented.
• Only the Medi-Cal enrolled CPSP provider may bill for services. Reimbursement is
made directly to the CPSP provider.
• Reimbursement for nutritional, psychosocial, and health education services will be
made only on an itemized basis and must not be billed globally.
• Nutritional, psychosocial and health education services in excess of the maximum
units of service require a Treatment Authorization Request (TAR). Refer to the
Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP) List of Billing Codes
section of this manual for information about maximum units of service.
Non-Reimbursable Services
Tobacco Cessation
Refer to the Pregnancy: Early Care and Diagnostic Services section of this manual for
information about provider requirements regarding pregnant and postpartum recipients who
use tobacco.
[[page 4]]
preg com
4
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: March 2024
Reimbursable Services
Services Reimbursable to CPSP Providers Only
Providers who choose not to apply to become CPSP providers may continue to provide
obstetrical services under Medi-Cal’s existing program.‹‹ However, only CPSP providers
may be reimbursed for the following:››
• Nutritional, psychosocial and health education services
• Vitamin and mineral supplements
• Client orientation
• Case coordination
Note: ‹‹If a CPSP provider contracts with an OB provider who is also a CPSP provider, both
providers should have a Provider Agreement in place that specifies which CPSP
services each provider will bill.››
CPSP and Obstetrical Out-of-Clinic Services
‹‹Hospital-based outpatient departments/clinics and non-hospital-based clinics that are
CPSP-enrolled providers may bill for CPSP and obstetrical services that are provided off-site
or out-of-clinic.›› These outpatient departments and clinics may bill for CPSP and obstetrical
services that are provided in off-site locations such as a physician’s office, a school
auditorium or a mobile van operated by a clinic.
Hospital based outpatient departments/clinics and non-hospital-based clinics may bill for off-
site CPSP and obstetrical services by using the following HCPCS codes with Place of
Service code “99” (other) for Medical Services providers and facility type code “14” for
Outpatient providers:
HCPCS Code Description
Z6200 thru Z6500 Comprehensive perinatal services
Z1032, Z1034, Z1038 Antepartum and postpartum visits
[[page 5]]
preg com
5
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: August 2020
Date of Entry Into Care
Entry into care is the date of the initial pregnancy-related office visit or the first initial
assessment, whichever is provided first. Certain CPSP services, as outlined in this section,
must be rendered within a limited number of weeks after a recipient enters into care.
Pregnancy-Related Services
Refer to the Pregnancy: Early Care and Diagnostic Services section of this manual for
additional information.
Billing Combined Assessments
HCPCS code Z6500 (combined assessments) may only be billed when a recipient receives
all three initial nutritional, health education and psychosocial assessments and the initial
pregnancy-related office visit (Z1032) within four weeks of entry into care. The date of the
last assessment must be shown as the date of service, and the provider must certify in the
Remarks field (Box 80)/Additional Claim Information field (Box 19) of the claim that all three
initial assessments were provided and enter all dates of service, even if all assessments
were rendered on the same date.
HCPCS code Z6500 is reimbursable once in six months unless the provider certifies on the
claim that the recipient has become pregnant again within the six-month period.
Claims for HCPCS code Z6500 are not reimbursable if the individual assessment codes
(Z6200, Z6300 and Z6402) have been billed by the same provider, for the same recipient,
within the previous six months. Conversely, claims for the individual assessment codes are
not payable if HCPCS code Z6500 has been billed by the same provider, for the same
recipient, within the previous six months.
See Figure 1 in the Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP) Billing
Examples section of this manual for a claim example.
Billing Individual Assessments
If fewer than three initial assessments are performed, or the initial assessments are not
performed within four weeks of entry into care, the provider must bill for the actual
assessments performed using the individual assessment codes (Z6200, Z6300 and/or
Z6402).
[[page 6]]
preg com
6
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: January 2024
Sequence of Services
The three initial assessments (nutrition, health education and psychosocial) and the initial
pregnancy-related office visit (HCPCS code Z1032) may be provided in any order and at any
time during the patient’s care. For example, if a patient does not consent to receive an initial
psychosocial assessment until seven weeks after entry into care, the individual assessment
(code Z6300), and any subsequent interventions, may still be performed and billed.
Intervention Services
The provider must complete the initial assessment within the discipline area (nutrition, health
education or psychosocial) before rendering any intervention services within that discipline.
Subsequent interventions (HCPCS codes Z6204, Z6206, etc.) may be provided before
completing the remaining initial assessments. For example, providers who complete the
initial psychosocial assessment may perform psychosocial interventions prior to completing
the remaining two initial assessments.
Note: Client orientation (code Z6400) and/or group perinatal education (code Z6412) may
be rendered before the initial health education assessment is completed.
Breast-Feeding-Related Services
Nutritional counseling services (HCPCS codes Z6200 thru Z6208), psychosocial support
services (HCPCS codes Z6300 thru Z6308) and health education services (HCPCS codes
Z6400 thru Z6414) related to breast-feeding are covered by CPSP. When billing these
services to CPSP, the appropriate HCPCS code should be entered in the Procedures,
Services, or Supplies field (Box 24D) of the CMS-1500 claim form or HCPCS/Rates field
(Box 44) of the UB-04 claim form.
Medical Services providers refer to Figure 2 in the Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal
Services Program (CPSP) Billing Examples – CMS-1500 section for a claim example.
Outpatient providers refer to Figure 7 in the Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services
Program (CPSP) Billing Examples – UB-04 section.
Pasteurized Donor Human Breast Milk
HCPCS code T2101 (human breast milk processing, storage and distribution only), to be
billed per 3 ounces per unit, 35 ounces per day, only good for 30 days; can be used for
medically necessary pasteurized donor human milk (PDHM) when obtained from a licensed
and approved facility. Coverage may be up to 12 months of age. For more information, refer
to the Pregnancy: Postpartum and Newborn Referral Services section in this manual.
‹‹HCPCS code A4287 (disposable collection and storage bag for breast milk, any size, any
type, each).››
[[page 7]]
preg com
7
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: October 2023
Preventive In-Home Services
CPSP services provided in a recipient’s home may be reimbursed if the services are
“preventive.” HCFA regulation 42 CFR 440.130 (c) defines “preventive services” as “services
provided by a physician or other licensed practitioner of the healing arts within the scope of
his practice under state law to (1) prevent disease, disability, and other health conditions or
their progression, (2) prolong life, and (3) promote physical and mental health and
efficiency.”
Eligible In-Home Services Providers
‹‹Only physicians and other licensed personnel (such as CNMs, LMs, RNs, LVNs, nurse
practitioners, PAs and licensed social workers) may provide in-home CPSP services.
Services rendered by a Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA) are not reimbursable.››
Providers should indicate in the Remarks area or Additional Claim Information field (Box 19)
of the claim the license number and type of professional that provided the in-home
preventive service.
Hospital Reimbursement: Outpatient Providers
Use of the hospital outpatient facility is not separately payable with HCPCS codes
Z6200 thru Z6500. Therefore, the hospital outpatient room rate (Z7500) will be denied when
billed with codes Z6200 thru Z6500.
HCPCS codes Z1032, Z1034 and Z1038 are reimbursed as a common office procedures at
80 percent of the allowed rate when the facility type is outpatient (“13”). HCPCS code Z7600
is payable when billed with Z1032, Z1034 or Z1038. These codes must cover the facility
cost.
[[page 8]]
preg com
8
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: July 2025
Incentives for Early and Frequent Prenatal Care
Introduction
Early and frequent prenatal care billed by CPSP providers may include a reimbursement
bonus.
Billing Initial Office Visit: Modifier ZL
‹‹The reimbursement for Z1032 will be based on the greater of the following two values:
• The base rate plus the ZL modifier, or
• The Targeted Rate Increase (TRI) rate››
Modifier ZL is exclusively used to bill with HCPCS code Z1032 (initial comprehensive
antepartum office visit). Billing with this modifier adds $56.63 to the reimbursement and
certifies that the visit occurred within 16 weeks of the patient’s last menstrual period [LMP]
(up to and including pregnancies of 16 weeks and 0/7ths days gestation only). The date of
the LMP is entered in Date of Current Illness, Injury or Pregnancy (LMP) field (Box 14) on
the CMS-1500 claim form and in the Remarks field (Box 80) on the UB-04 claim form.
Modifier ZL is reimbursable only once during a pregnancy. Claims billed in excess of this
limit will be denied.
Note: When billing modifier ZL, providers must add $56.63 to the total charges.
Medical Services providers see Figure 3 in the Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal
Services Program (CPSP) Billing Examples – CMS-1500 section for a claim example.
Outpatient providers see Figure 1 in the Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services
Program (CPSP) Billing Examples – UB-04 section for a claim example.
Billing Initial Office Visit: Early Entry Rendered by NMP
When billing for entry into care within 16 weeks of LMP and the service is rendered by a
Non-Physician Medical Practitioner (NMP), use the appropriate multiple modifiers instead of
modifier ZL. NMPs include Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs), Licensed Midwives (LMs),
Nurse Practitioners (NPs) and Physician Assistants (PAs). In the Remarks field (Box 80) or
Additional Claim Information field (Box 19), include the NMP name, California license
number and type of NMP (for example, CNM, LM, NP or PA).
[[page 9]]
preg com
9
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: July 2025
Type of NMP HCPCS
Multiple
Modifier
Note in Remarks Field (Box 80) or Additional Claim
Information Field (Box 19) when Billing with Modifier
99
CNM 99 Modifier 99 = SB + additional modifiers as appropriate
LM 99 Modifier 99 = U9 + additional modifiers as appropriate
NP 99 Modifier 99 = SA + additional modifiers as appropriate
PA 99 Modifier 99 = U7 + additional modifiers as appropriate
Modifier Tips
The preceding multiple modifier must be used whenever billing for a service that requires a
multiple NMP modifier, not just when billing for early entry into care. Modifiers are not
required when billing for HCPCS codes Z6200 thru Z6500.
Share of Cost
Requirements
Recipients who choose to participate in the CPSP program are required to pay or obligate
their Share of Cost each month even if the obstetrical services are billed globally.
Treatment Authorization Requests
Additional CPSP Services
Comprehensive perinatal services are covered subject to the requirements specified on the
preceding pages. Providers may submit a Treatment Authorization Request (TAR) for
nutrition, psychosocial, or health education services in excess of the basic allowances if the
provider documents those additional services are medically necessary.
TARs requesting additional services must be completely filled out and include the following
information:
• Amount of time/number of services being requested
• Anticipated benefit or outcome of additional services
• Clinical findings of the high risk factors involved in the pregnancy
• Description of the services being requested
• Expected Date of Confinement (EDC)
• Explanation of why the basic CPSP services will not be sufficient
[[page 10]]
preg com
10
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: July 2025
Enter the entire 11-digit TAR Control Number on the claim when billing for additional TAR
authorized services. A copy of the TAR is not required when billing. Do not combine TAR
and non-TAR services on the same claim form.
See Figures 5 and 6 in the Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Billing Examples section of this manual for a TAR and claim example.
Billing Instructions
Introduction
Use the following instructions when billing for CPSP services:
• Comprehensive perinatal service procedure codes must be billed as individual charges
for each date of service. “From-through” billing format cannot be used.
• When a rendering provider number is required (for example, physician group billing),
the provider number of the comprehensive perinatal physician must be used as the
rendering provider. Do not use group provider numbers for the rendering provider.
• Medi-Cal may recoup payments if an audit shows that the patient records lack
documentation to establish that services were provided as billed.
• Patients who receive Medi-Cal benefits following the birth of a child also may receive
CPSP interventions in any area or discipline when an initial assessment is performed
prior to the intervention.
Calculating Billing Units
CPSP support services are billed in units. One unit equals 15 minutes. Fractions of units are
calculated this way:
• 00 thru 07 minutes equals 0 units, which is not payable
• 08 thru 22 minutes equals 1 unit
• 23 thru 37 minutes equals 2 units
• 38 thru 51 minutes equals 3 units
Exceptions: HCPCS code Z6500 (see information elsewhere in this section). HCPCS
codes Z6200, Z6300 and Z6402 are billed in 30-minute units.
[[page 11]]
preg com
11
Part 2 – Pregnancy: Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program (CPSP)
Page updated: March 2024
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.
* The coordination fee is only reimbursable if all three initial assessments and
the initial pregnancy-related office visit are provided within four weeks of entry
into care.
‡ Maximum allowable reimbursement without authorization if all support
services are provided and billed. In high risk circumstances, additional
support services may be requested through the TAR process.