[[page 1]]
rural ex
1
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing
Examples
Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified
Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing Examples
Page updated: December 2020
The example in this section is to help providers bill Rural Health Clinic (RHC) and Federally
Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) services on the UB-04 Claim Form. Refer to the Rural
Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) section in this
manual for general billing information. Refer to the UB-04 Completion: Outpatient Services
section of this manual for instructions to complete claim fields not explained in the following
example. For additional claim preparation information, refer to the
Forms: Legibility and Completion Standards section of this manual.
Billing Tips: When completing claims, do not enter the decimal points in ICD-10-CM codes
or dollar amounts. If requested information does not fit neatly in the Remarks
field (Box 80) of the claim, type it on an 8½ x 11-inch sheet of paper and attach
it to the claim ‹‹form››.
[[page 2]]
rural ex
2
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing
Examples
Page updated: December 2020
Managed Care Differential Rate
Figure 1. Managed Care differential rate billing code set.
This is a sample only. Please adapt to your billing situation.
John Doe visited a ‹‹RHC›› for evaluation of his recent chest pain. He is enrolled in a
Medi-Cal managed care plan ‹‹(MCP)›› and the service is covered under the plan. The RHC
bills the ‹‹MCP›› for the encounter. The clinic may submit a ‹‹managed care differential rate
claim (also known as the “wrap”)›› to Medi-Cal with revenue code 0521, procedure code with
modifier T1015SE and an informational line specific to his visit, which in this case is
procedure code 99214.
On claim line 1, enter the revenue code 0521 in the Revenue Code field (Box 42), the
description of the code (Managed Care Differential Rate) in the Description field (Box 43)
and the corresponding procedure code with modifier (T1015SE) in the HCPCS/Rate field
(Box 44). Enter the date of service in the Service Date field (Box 45) in six-digit format.
A “1” is entered in the Service Units field (Box 46) for Managed Care Differential Rate billing
code set to indicate the billing is for the differential for one visit (more than one visit can be
billed with medical justification). Enter the usual and customary charges in the
Total Charges field (Box 47).
On claim line 2, enter the revenue code and procedure code specific to the visit in Revenue
Code field (Box 42) and HCPCS/Rate field (Box 44) respectively, followed by the date of
service in the Service Date field (Box 45). A “1” is entered in the Service Units field (Box 46)
for the number of service units provided for the procedure code. When filling out an
informational line, Box 47 must be zeros because this line is not payable. Enter Code 001 in
the Revenue Code column (Box 42, line 23) to designate that this is the total charge line and
enter the totals of all charges in the Total Charges field (Box 47, line 23).
Note: When billing for the managed care differential rate, Box 39 and Box 54 on the UB-04
claim must be left blank, as these fields are reserved respectively for Share of Cost
(SOC) and Other Health Care Coverage (OHC) only.
If billing the Managed Care Differential Rate for both a medical and dental visit, or for
a third visit (allowable only in special circumstances) on the same dates of service,
billers should refer to the Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health
Centers (FQHCs): Billing Codes section for billing instruction.
[[page 3]]
rural ex
3
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing
Examples
Page updated: December 2020
Enter “O/P Medi-Cal” to indicate the type of claim and payer in the Payer Name field
(Box 50). The NPI is placed in the NPI field (Box 56).
Enter an appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnosis code. Because this claim is submitted with a
diagnosis code, an ICD indicator is required in the white space below the DX field (Box 66).
An indicator is required when an ICD-10-CM/PCS code is entered on the claim.
Enter the rendering physician’s NPI in the Operating field (Box 77). ‹‹or the Ordering
Referring or Prescribing (ORP) provider’s individual (Type 1) NPI in Attending field (Box
76).››
Refer to the UB-04 Completion: Outpatient Services section of this manual for instructions
to complete the remaining fields.
[[page 4]]
rural ex
4
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing
Examples
Page updated: December 2020
Figure 1: Managed Care Differential Rate Billing Code Set
[[page 5]]
rural ex
5
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing
Examples
Page updated: August 2020
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.