[[page 1]]
rural hosp
1
Part 2 – Rural Hospital Swing Bed Program
Rural Hospital Swing Bed Program
Page updated: January 2024
The rural hospital swing bed program offers Long Term Care (LTC) services in areas where
there is a shortage of Nursing Facility Level B (NF-B) beds.
Eligibility Criteria
To be eligible for the rural hospital swing bed program, hospitals must:
• Meet the standards for hospitals specified in California Code of Regulations (CCR),
Title 22, Section 51207.
• Be certified as a special hospital provider of long term care services under Title XVIII
of the federal Social Security Act.
• Be approved by the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) as a primary health
services hospital in accordance with Division 2, Article 10, of the Health and Safety
Code commencing with Section 1339.
Bed Designation
Under the program, rural hospitals may designate some beds for use interchangeably as
acute beds or nursing facility beds.
Administrative Days
Administrative days may be authorized for swing bed facility patients who meet all the
following appropriate criteria:
• Patient needs NF-B care.
• Patient is occupying a bed designated as an acute care bed.
• Hospital has established that no NF-B bed is available.
• Occupancy rate for all designated swing beds is 100 percent.
‹‹Administrative days will be billed using the facility’s acute care provider number with the
appropriate combination of revenue code 0199, value code 24, and value code amount 98 or
Los Angeles County Waiver administrative day code 52.››
[[page 2]]
rural hosp
2
Part 2 – Rural Hospital Swing Bed Program
Page updated: January 2024
Enrollment
Providers wishing to participate in the swing bed program should contact their licensing and
certification district office. Certified providers will be issued LTC provider numbers and
manuals containing instructions for billing swing bed services.
Reimbursement
‹‹NF-B services provided to patients in swing beds will be reimbursed pursuant to CCR, Title
22, Section 51511 (a) (3). Participating hospitals should follow the billing instructions in the
UB-04 Completion: Long Term Care Services section of this manual and use revenue code
0101, value code 24 and value code amount 04 for inpatient services and revenue code
0180, value code 24 and value code amount 05 for leave days. Refer to the Revenue and
Value Codes for Long Term Care and Rates: Facility Per Diem sections in this manual.››
Providers participating in the swing bed program should be aware that the reimbursement
received for NF-B services may impact acute care reimbursement rates.
Providers billing for LTC services in swing beds may receive reimbursement for:
• NF-B services at the appropriate swing bed rate
• Patients on approved leave of absence
• Bed hold days
Outpatient services for NF-B patients, on the other hand, will be reimbursed at the hospital’s
fee-for-service outpatient rates and will be billed using the facility’s Outpatient provider
number.
[[page 3]]
rural hosp
3
Part 2 – Rural Hospital Swing Bed Program
Page updated: August 2020
‹‹Legend››
‹‹Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.››
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.