[[page 1]]
rural cd
1
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified
Health Centers (FQHCs): Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
This section contains Rural Health Clinic (RHC) and Federally Qualified Health Center
(FQHC) per visit billing codes and rules for reimbursement requirements. These codes sets
apply to claims reimbursed at the all-inclusive Medi-Cal Prospective Payment System (PPS)
rate on file with the Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) Medi-Cal Program, unless
indicated otherwise.
RHC and FQHC providers must use these per-visit billing codes when submitting
reimbursement claims to the Medi-Cal Fiscal Intermediary (FI).
For more information on RHC and FQHC policy and billing instructions, refer to the Rural
Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) section of this
manual.
Note: Medi-Cal policy material is updated periodically by DHCS. All providers are
responsible for ensuring that the policy they are following the most current versions of
Medi-Cal coverage and reimbursement policy.
General Information
Medi-Cal reimburses RHC and FQHC providers in accordance with California’s Medicaid
State Plan as approved by the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
under Title XIX of the Social Security Act.
Section 702 of the Medicare, Medicaid, and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program
(SCHIP) Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (BIPA) established the Medicaid
PPS rate for FQHCs and RHCs. This reimbursement structure is a fixed, all-inclusive per-
visit rate. DHCS sets and maintains PPS rates.
When RHCs or FQHCs provide services to Medi-Cal managed care members, the member’s
Medi-Cal managed care plan (MCP) pays the RHC or FQHC provider a negotiated
contracted rate. Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code (WIC) section 14087.325(d), and
Social Security Act § 1903(m)(2)(A)(ix) Medi-Cal MCPs must reimburse contracted RHCs or
FQHCs in a manner that is no less than the level and amount of payment that the Medi-Cal
MCP would make for the same scope of services if the services were furnished by another
provider type that is not an RHC or FQHC.
[[page 2]]
rural cd
2
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Additionally, under 42 United States Code (U.S.C.) section 1396a(bb)(5)(A), if this
negotiated contracted rate is less than the RHC’s or FQHC’s PPS rate, the state must make
a supplemental “wrap” payment equal to the difference. This ensures that RHCs and FQHCs
are fully reimbursed at their federally mandated PPS rate, regardless of whether services
are delivered through the fee-for-service or managed care delivery system.
Note: The supplemental payment is also referred to as the MCP differential rate (wrap).
RHC and FQHC providers must adhere to DHCS policy requirements when submitting
reimbursement claims to the Medi-Cal FI for services rendered to Medi-Cal fee-for-service
members. Similarly, RHC and FQHC providers must adhere to both DHCS policy
requirements as well as any additional Medi-Cal MCP guidance when submitting
reimbursement claims for services rendered to Medi-Cal members in managed care.
Note: In addition to DHCS policies, Medi-Cal MCPs may establish their own specific billing
and reimbursement procedures, documentation standards, and submission protocols
that providers must follow. These can include verifying member eligibility, electronic
claim or other submission requirements, claim formatting, coding standards, utilization
management (UM) controls, including prior authorization (PA) requirements, out-of-
network coordination, and more. Medi-Cal MCP requirements should align with DHCS
policies and may include additional operational or documentation requirements. RHC
and FQHC providers are encouraged to consult the respective Medi-Cal MCP’s
guidance and policies for detailed guidance and requirements, as these may vary by
plan.
Member Eligibility
To prevent billing denials, RHC and FQHC providers must check the member's Medi-Cal
eligibility prior to scheduling services and at the time of the service.
Note: Refer to the Eligibility: Recipient Identification or AEVS: General Instructions section
of the Part 1 manual for instructions on how to verify a members eligibility.
Qualifying Visits
Qualifying visits occur when an RHC or FQHC provides medically necessary primary or
preventive outpatient services to eligible members, either face-to-face or via an approved
telehealth modality, which are delivered by providers authorized under the Medi-Cal State
Plan and acting within their scope of practice.
Under the existing Medi-Cal reimbursement policy, RHC and FQHC providers may bill one (1)
medical or mental health visit and one (1) dental visit at the Medi-Cal PPS rate per member
per day when RHC and FQHC covered services are rendered by authorized providers acting
within their scope of practice.
[[page 3]]
rural cd
3
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Multiple services and supplies furnished “incidents to” a billable practitioner’s service may be
provided during a single visit. However, a visit consisting solely of “incident to” service(s)
does not constitute a qualifying visit eligible for PPS reimbursement.
Consistent with 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) sections 405.2413 and 405.2415,
and Section 1395x(s)(2)(A) of Title 42 of the United States Code, “incident to” services are
those furnished as an integral, though incidental part of a billable practitioner’s services and
are included with the PPS rate rather than billed as a separate encounter. Examples can
include the administration of injections (such as vaccines), routine clinical services furnished
by clinic staff (such as laboratory services, x-rays, etc.). These services must be furnished
under appropriate supervision and within applicable scope of practice requirements.
Exceptions: Two visits can be billed on the same day (which may be at a different location)
only in the following situations:
• When a member, after the first visit, suffers illness or injury that requires another health
diagnosis or treatment, two visits may be counted. Medical justification is required in
the Remarks field (Box 80) or on an attachment to the claim. Refer to Figure 1 in the
Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) Billing
Example section in this manual. For example, a member sees their provide in the
morning for a medical condition and later in the day falls and returns to the clinic);
• When a member is seen by a provider or a Comprehensive Perinatal Services
Program (CPSP) practitioner and also receives dental services on the same day.
Note: A second visit can only be counted under the exceptions noted above.
For more information on the definition of an RHC and FQHC visit, refer to the Rural Health
Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) section in this manual.
Documentation Requirements
Under Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations (CCR) section 51476 and existing
DHCS policy, Medi-Cal providers must maintain complete, accurate, and timely
documentation that fully discloses the type and extent of services rendered to Medi-Cal
members. Records should be created at or near the time of service and include patient
identification, date of service, provider credentials and signature, clinical details (such as
history, diagnosis or treatment plan), progress notes, and any prescribed medications or
devices. Documentation must also capture consent forms, interpreter use, advance
directives, and coordination of care activities, such as referrals and follow-ups.
[[page 4]]
rural cd
4
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
In addition, providers are required to keep copies of billing records, including supporting
documents (for example, authorization approvals, lab orders and results, and invoices for
drugs or supplies). All documentation must be legible, dated, timed, and authenticated by
the rendering provider, with supervising signatures when required. Pursuant to WIC section
14124.1 records must be readily retrievable and retained for at least 10 years or longer if
mandated by DHCS and/or applicable state or federal requirements. Failure to meet these
standards can result in claim denials or audit findings, as DHCS considers proper
documentation of Medi-Cal services essential for verifying medical necessity and
compliance with Medi-Cal policies.
For additional information, refer to the Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified
Health Centers (FQHCs) section of this manual.
Billing Forms
When submitting claims directly to DHCS, RHC and FQHC providers should submit the ASC
X12N 837I standard electronic form through the Computer Media Claims (CMC) system or
use the CMS Form 1450 (UB-04) paper claim form, unless otherwise instructed.›› For more
information on how to complete the forms, refer to the UB-04 Completion: Outpatient
Services and UB-04 Submission and Timeliness Instructions section of this manual or
Special Billing Instructions: Federally Qualified Health Centers Rural Health Clinics and
Indian Health Services Memorandum of Agreement.
Note: Services billed to Medi-Cal MCPs must use the billing forms required by the individual
Medi-Cal MCP.
National Provider Identifier (NPI)
RHC and FQHC providers must submit all claims under the enrolled NPI (UB-04 Box 56)
and must include the physical address of the location where services were rendered (UB-04
Box 1). This requirement is mandated to ensure compliance with Medi-Cal billing standards
and to accurately attribute the service to the appropriate location for crossover, Medi-Cal
MCP, and Medi-Cal fee-for-service claims.
Informational Lines
An informational line is an associated line item(s) listed immediately following the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)-compliant RHC or FQHC per-visit
billing code set used to bill the visit with the Medi-Cal member.›› Informational lines contain
all CPT-4 Level I or HCPCS Level II code(s) that identify the actual service(s) provided.
When billing for RHC or FQHC covered services, informational lines should be included in
addition to the RHC or FQHC per visit billing code sets included in this manual.
Note: Informational lines are not separately reimbursed.
[[page 5]]
rural cd
5
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
When submitting informational lines, RHC and FQHC providers should remember the
following:
• The Revenue Code field on the information claim detail line must be a four-digit
revenue code. Blank spaces and zeros are accepted for CMC.
• The Service Date field is optional but recommended.
• The Service Units field on the informational line may contain the number of service
units provided for the procedure code.
• The Total Charges field for each informational line must always be zero.
Telehealth Modalities and Required Modifiers
RHC and FQHC covered services may be provided via allowable telehealth modalities
including synchronous audio-only (modifier 93), synchronous audio-visual (video) (modifier
95), or Asynchronous Store and Forward (modifier GQ), consistent with all of the
requirements outlined in the Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health
Centers (FQHCs) section in this manual. RHC and FQHC providers will submit claims for
telehealth services with the applicable telehealth modifiers and the specific CPT-4 Level I or
HCPCS Level II code(s) that identify the actual service(s) on the informational line of the
claim.
The modifiers shall be used with the appropriate billing codes when submitting claims to the
Medi-Cal MCP. For RHC and FQHC telehealth policy, including non-covered telehealth
modalities, and billing scenarios, refer to the Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally
Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs)(rural) sections of this manual.
Out-of-Network (OON) Medi-Cal MCP Services
In accordance with 42 CFR section § 438.206 (b)(5), OON providers (for example, RHC or
FQHC providers not assigned as the member’s primary care physician or clinic) are required
to coordinate with the Medi-Cal member’s MCP for authorization and payment. The clinic
must obtain prior authorization to act as an OON provider and redirect the member to their
in-network provider or request reassignment from MCP to their clinic.
Members enrolled in a Medi-Cal MCP or Medi-Cal Dental Managed Care (DMC) plan must
receive services from in-network MCP providers, except in urgent or other isolated
circumstances. If the member is not enrolled in a Medi-Cal Dental managed care plan, a
straight Medi-Cal dental visit may be billed, per-visit code 03.
[[page 6]]
rural cd
6
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
If an RHC or FQHC delivers an urgent or isolated medical, mental health, or dental service
to a member not assigned to them, the RHC or FQHC must:
• Document and retain records of all efforts to obtain OON authorization from the
member’s assigned MCP.
• Redirect the member back to their in-network MCP provider or request reassignment
from the MCP to their clinic.
• Document these actions in the member’s medical or dental record.
Other Health Care (OHC) Coverage/Payer of Last Resort
In accordance with applicable federal Medicaid requirements and state statute (WIC section
14124.90), Medi-Cal is designated as the payer of last resort. All providers including RHCs
and FQHCs must make reasonable efforts to identify and bill OHC coverage including but
not limited to commercial health insurance and Medicare before submitting reimbursement
or differential rate wrap claims directly to DHCS. Note the following:
• DHCS will assume financial responsibility for covered services only after OHC and
coverage by the Medi-Cal MCP has been fully exhausted, or if services are listed on
the exclusions list (for example, the Medicare Non-Covered Provider Manual).
• Reimbursement will be limited to the lesser of the Medi-Cal allowable amount or the
remaining balance after third-party payment, up to the PPS per-visit rate.
• Providers must also generally submit supporting documentation (for example, receipt
of OHC reimbursement or a denial for coverage) when submitting claims to DHCS,
unless the service is listed on the exclusions list.
• Providers must make reasonable efforts to identify and bill the OHC. All OHC
reimbursement must be reported on the annual reconciliation report.
Note: Failure to comply with these requirements may result in claim denials, recoupment
actions, or other enforcement measures as permitted under state and federal law.
For more information on OHC and related policies, refer to the following sections in the
provider manual:
• Other Health Coverage (OHC)
• Other Health Coverage (OHC) Guidelines for Billing
• Provider Regulations
• Provider Guidelines
[[page 7]]
rural cd
7
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Annual Reconciliation
An annual reconciliation request is submitted to DHCS Audits and Investigations (A&I)
Financial Review – Outpatient and Behavioral Health Division (FROBHD). The purpose of
the annual reconciliation request is to reconcile the difference between reimbursements from
Medicare, Medi-Cal MCPs, OHC payments, and the Medi-Cal PPS rates of the RHC and
FQHC providers. Medi-Cal MCP differential rates and Medicare differential rates are
adjusted upon request to A&I FROBHD by RHC or FQHC providers.
Note: Only adjudicated RHC or FQHC visits will be reconciled through the annual
Reconciliation Request.
RHCs and FQHCs should regularly consult the DHCS Audits & Investigations (A&I) forms
webpage for updated instructions, forms, and documents related to:
• Annual reconciliation submissions
• Differential payment adjustments
• Medicare Advantage (MA) Plan Code 529
• Other A&I Forms and Documents
All questions and correspondence should be directed to DHCS’ A&I Division, FROBHD, via
email at: clinics@dhcs.ca.gov.
Medical or Mental Health Services for Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service
Members
Table of Per-Visit Billing Code Set: Medical or Mental Health Services for Fee-
For-Service Members
Revenue
Code
Procedure Code
and Modifier
Description Explanation
0521 T1015 Medical or Mental Health
per visit
Requires medical justification
for more than one visit per
member per day
RHC and FQHC providers must use this per-visit billingcode set when a covered service is
rendered by a billable health care professional to Medi-Cal fee-for-service members. The
per-visit billing code set rate is based on the Medi-Cal PPS rate currently on file for the RHC
or FQHC provider. Therefore, the services are not eligible for the Medi-Cal MCP differential
rate (wrap) payment. The Informational line(s) should contain the specific CPT-4 Level I or
HCPCS Level II code(s) that identify the actual service(s) provided.
[[page 8]]
rural cd
8
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Table of Per-Visit Billing Code Sets: Optometry services for Fee-For-Service
Members
Revenue
Code
Procedure Code and
Modifier
Description
0521 92004 Clinic visit optometry – Facility-specific Medi-Cal PPS
rate. New patient
0521 92014 Clinic visit optometry – Facility-specific Medi-Cal PPS
rate. Established patient
RHC and FQHC providers must use the appropriate per-visit billing code set as shown in the
above table when a licensed optometrist acting within their scope of practice renders a
covered service to Medi-Cal fee-for-service members. Optometry service is considered a
medical visit for billing purposes.
A second eye examination with refraction within twenty-four months is covered only when a
sign or symptom indicates a need for this service, per 22 CCR Section 51306.
The per-visit billing code set rate is based on the Medi-Cal PPS rate currently on file for the
RHC or FQHC provider. Therefore, this service is not eligible for the MCP differential rate
(wrap) payment. Refer to the Reimbursement for Optometry Services section of the Vision
Care provider manual for additional information.
Dental Services for Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service or Dental Managed
Care (DMC) Members
RHC and FQHC providers may render dental services through a face-to-face encounter or
via an approved telehealth modality. Services must be delivered by dental providers
authorized under the Medi-Cal State Plan and acting within the scope of practice. All
services must comply with the Medi-Cal Dental Manual of Criteria and Schedule of
Maximum Allowances and be determined to be medically necessary pursuant to WIC
Section 14059.5. Each provider must develop a treatment plan that optimizes preventative
and therapeutic care and that is in the members best interest, taking into consideration their
overall health status. All phases of the treatment plan shall be rendered in a safe, effective,
equitable, member-centered, timely, and efficient manner.
[[page 9]]
rural cd
9
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Table of Per Visit Billing Code Set: Dental Services for Fee-For-Service
Members or MCP Members Not Enrolled in a DMC Plan
Per Visit Code Procedure Description
03 Dental
Services
This code is for fee-for service members or MCP
members NOT enrolled in a DMC plan
RHC and FQHC providers must use this per-visit local code for dental services rendered to a
fee-for service member who is not enrolled in a DMC plan.
RHC and FQHC providers must include the ICD-10 diagnosis code Z29.3 (encounter for
prophylactic fluoride administration) as a secondary diagnosis code (not the principal
diagnosis) when submitting claims for dental services that include fluoride varnish
applications during an eligible dental visit for Medi-Cal members. This requirement applies to
UB-04 claim forms to improve documentation and reporting of preventive dental services.
The RHC or FQHC would also include the applicable Current Dental Terminology (CDT)
code(s) on the claim’s information line(s) of the UB-04 claim form to ensure accurate
utilization tracking.
The per-visit local code rate is based on the Medi-Cal PPS rate currently on file for the RHC
or FQHC provider.
Table of Per Visit Billing Code Set: Dental Services for MCP Members Enrolled
in a DMC Plan
Revenue
Code
Procedure
Code and
Modifier
Description
0521 T1015 SE Dental services that are delivered to members enrolled in
a Medi-Cal DMC plan
RHC and FQHC providers must use this MCP differential rate (wrap) per-visit billing code set
(revenue and procedure codes with modifier) for dental services rendered to an MCP
member enrolled in a DMC Plan.
RHC and FQHC providers must include the ICD-10 diagnosis code Z29.3 (encounter for
prophylactic fluoride administration) as a secondary diagnosis code (not the principal
diagnosis) when submitting claims for dental services that include fluoride varnish
applications during an eligible dental visit for Medi-Cal members. This requirement applies to
UB-04 claim forms to improve documentation and reporting of preventive dental services.
The RHC or FQHC providers would also include the applicable Current Dental Terminology
(CDT) code(s) on the claim’s information line(s) of the UB-04 claim form to ensure accurate
utilization tracking.››
[[page 10]]
rural cd
10
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
RHC and FQHC providers are eligible for a differential rate(wrap) payment when submitting
claims for services rendered to members enrolled in a DMC plan. These payments are
intended to cover the difference between the amount paid by the DMC plan and the RHC or
FQHC’s Medi-Cal PPS per-visit rate for eligible visits. The per-visit billing code set is based
on the Medi-Cal PPS differential rate currently on file for RHC or FQHC providers.
The RHC or FQHC provider would bill the DMC plan and separately submit a reimbursement
claim to the Medi-Cal FI using the per-visit billing code set above. The RHC or FQHC would
also include the applicable CDT code(s) on the claim's informational line(s) of the UB-04
claim form accurate utilization tracking.
Documentation for dental services should be consistent with the standards set forth in the
Manual of Criteria and Schedule of Maximum Allowances of the Medi-Cal Dental Provider
Handbook and all state laws. Also refer to the Safety Net Clinic (SNC) Dental Frequently
Asked Questions on the Medi-Cal Dental Service Division webpage.
Note: Providers must submit claims to the Medi-Cal FI using the MCP differential per visit
billing code set for members enrolled in DMC plans in Sacramento County, Los
Angeles County or Health Plan of San Mateo County (see the above table).
Medical or Mental Health Services for Managed Care Members
The majority of members are enrolled in a Medi-Cal MCP, and RHCs and FQHCs typically
serve as contracted network providers within Medi-Cal MCPs to deliver covered health care
services.
Table of Per-Visit Billing Code Set: Medi-Cal MCP Differential Rate (Wrap) Payment for
Medical Services for MCP Members
Revenue
Code
Procedure
Code and
Modifier
Description Explanation
0521 T1015 SE Services rendered to
members enrolled in a
Medi-Cal MCP
Requires medical
justification for more
than one visit per
member per day
[[page 11]]
rural cd
11
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
RHC and FQHC providers must use this MCP differential rate (wrap) per-visit billing code set
for services rendered to Medi-Cal members enrolled in a Medi-Cal MCP. This differential
rate (wrap) is intended to approximate the difference between the weighted average
payments received from the MCPs and the provider’s established Medi-Cal PPS rate. The
reimbursement for this per-visit billing code set is based on the Medi-Cal PPS differential
rate currently on file for the RHC or FQHC provider.
To complete the MCP differential rate (wrap) payment process for the eligible visit, the RHC
or FQHC provider must submit a claim to the MCP for payment or adjudication even if the
service is rendered to an OON member, there is no contract in place, or other circumstances
such as OHC. A separate reimbursement claim must then be submitted to the Medi-Cal FI
for the differential rate (wrap) payment using the per-visit billing code set above. The RHC or
FQHC would also include the applicable CPT® or HCPCS code(s) on the claim's
informational line(s), of the UB-04 claim form for accurate utilization tracking.
Note: Incident-to services must be billed to the MCP if they are covered under the MCP’s
contract. However, incident-to services are not eligible for differential rate (wrap)
payments because the PPS differential rate (wrap) is intended only for qualifying
visits. Since incident-to services do not meet this definition and are already
reimbursed through the MCP, there is no additional differential payment owed. MCP
payments for incident-to services are subject to reconciliation regardless of whether
or not a billable RHC or FQHC visit is rendered.
Billing for Medi-Cal Covered Services Provided to Dually Eligible
Members
A member who is enrolled in both federal Medicare and Medi-Cal who qualifies for benefits
under both programs is known as a “dually eligible”/dual-eligible member.
Billing for dually eligible members involves coordination of benefits and billing through
Medicare, Medi-Cal, and Medi-Cal MCPs for managed care members.
When billing for services provided to dually eligible members, claims may either
automatically crossover from Medicare to Medi-Cal or Medi-Cal MCP or need to be billed
directly to Medi-Cal. Refer to the following manuals for additional information:
• Medicare/Medi-Cal Crossover Claims Overview
• Medicare Non-Covered Services: CPT Codes
• Medicare Non-Covered Services: HCPCS Codes
• Medicare/Medi-Cal Crossover Claims: Outpatient Services
[[page 12]]
rural cd
12
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Crossover Claims for Dually Eligible Members
Table of Per-Visit Billing Code Sets: Crossover Claims for Fee-For-Service Members
Enrolled in Original Medicare or Medicare Advantage Plan (MA) (Non-Capitated
Arrangement)
Revenue
Code
Procedure Code
and Modifier
Description
0521 G0466 Crossover claims, clinic visit, new patient
0521 G0467 Crossover claims, clinic visit, established patient
0521 G0468 Crossover claims, clinic visit Initial Preventive Physical
Exam (IPPE) or Annual Wellness Visit (AWV)
0522 G0466 Crossover claims, home visit, new patient
0522 G0467 Crossover claims, home visit, established patient
0522 G0468 Crossover claims, home visit Initial Preventive Physical
Exam (IPPE) or Annual Wellness Visit (AWV)
0524 G0466 Crossover claims, visit covered Part A stay at a Skilled
Nursing facility, new patient
0524 G0467 Crossover claims, visit covered Part A stay at a Skilled
Nursing facility, established patient
0524 G0468 Crossover claims, visit covered Part A stay at a Skilled
Nursing facility, Initial Preventive Physical Exam (IPPE)
or Annual Wellness Visit (AWV)
0525 G0466 Crossover claims, visit (not covered Part A stay) at a
Skilled Nursing facility, new patient
0525 G0467 Crossover claims, visit (not covered Part A stay) at a
Skilled Nursing facility, established patient
0525 G0468 Crossover claims, visit (not covered Part A stay) at a
Skilled Nursing facility, Initial Preventive Physical Exam
(IPPE) or Annual Wellness Visit (AWV)
0527 G0466 Crossover claims, visiting nurse to home, new patient
(as defined in Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title
42, Section 405.2416)
0527 G0467 Crossover claims, visiting nurse to home, established
patient (as defined in Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR), Title 42, Section 405.2416)
0527 G0468 Crossover claims, FQHC visiting nurse to home
IPPE or AWV
0900 G0469 Crossover claims, mental health visit, new patient
0900 G0470 Crossover claims, mental health visit, established
patient
[[page 13]]
rural cd
13
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
RHC or FQHC providers, when submitting a crossover claim, must use the appropriate
per-visit billing code set, shown in the table above, that most accurately describes the
service rendered to a fee-for-service member who is dually enrolled in Original Medicare or
in a Medicare Advantage Plan (Non-Capitated Arrangement). In this circumstance, Original
Medicare or in a Medicare Advantage Plan (Non-Capitated Arrangement) is the primary
coverage and Medi-Cal fee-for-service is secondary coverage.
The reimbursement rate for crossover claim codes are set at an amount that is intended to
cover the difference between the Medicare payment and the Medi-Cal PPS rate currently on
file for the RHC and FQHC provider.
The above codes require the Medicare Explanation of Medical Benefits (EOMB), Medicare
Remittance Advice Notice (MRN), or Remittance Advice (RA) to be attached to the claim.
When the Medi-Cal eligibility verification system indicates a member has original Medicare
coverage, Medicare must be billed first to the appropriate Medicare Administrative
Contractor (MAC) for processing.
For members enrolled in a Medicare Advantage non-capitated arrangement, the clinic must
bill the Medicare Advantage plan first, then the MAC, for the Medicare Advantage Wrap-
Around Payment (Revenue Code 519) before billing Medi-Cal.
Note (For UB-04 claim forms): Do not enter Medicare status information in Condition Codes
(boxes 24-30) fields. The following statement must be included in the Remarks (Box
80) field of the claim or submit it as an 8 1/2" x 11" attachment: “For a fee-for-service
Medi-Cal member enrolled in a fee-for-service Medicare Advantage Plan.”
Table of Per Visit Billing Code Sets: Cross Over Claims Payment for Fee-For-Service
Members Enrolled in Medicare Advantage Plan (Capitated Arrangement)
Revenue
Code
Procedure Code
and Modifier
Description
0529 G0466 Capitated Medicare Advantage Plans clinic visit, new
patient
0529 G0467 Capitated Medicare Advantage Plans clinic visit,
established patient
0529 G0468 Capitated Medicare Advantage Plans clinic visit
Initial Preventive Physical Exam (IPPE) or Annual
Wellness Visit (AWV)
0529 G0469 Capitated Medicare Advantage Plans Mental Health visit,
new patient
0529 G0470 Capitated Medicare Advantage Plans Mental Health visit
established patient
[[page 14]]
rural cd
14
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
RHC or FQHC providers, when submitting a crossover claim, must us the appropriate
per-visit billing code set, shown in the table above, that most accurately describes the
service rendered to a fee-for-service member who is dually enrolled in a Medicare
Advantage Plan (Capitated Arrangement). In this circumstance the Medicare Advantage
Plan (Capitated Arrangement) is the primary coverage and Medi-Cal fee-for-service is
secondary coverage.››
The reimbursement rate for crossover claim codes are set at an amount that is intended to
cover the difference between the Medicare payment and the Medi-Cal PPS rate currently on
file for the RHC or FQHC provider.
For claims submitted using Capitated MA plans per visit billing code sets where no EOB,
MRN or RA are provided, and where the service is not reflected on the current Medicare
Non-Covered Services list, the RHC or FQHC provider must include documentation of
Medicare denial or attempts to bill Medicare and receive a denial. The RHC or FQHC
provider should keep the documentation of Medicare non-payment on file, which must be
made available upon DHCS request, for the Annual Reconciliation, or in the event of a state
or federal audit.
Table of Per-Visit Billing Code Set for MCP Differential Rate Payment for MCP
Members Enrolled in Original Medicare or MA Plan (Fee-For Service or Capitated
Arrangements)
Revenue
Code
Procedure Code
and Modifier
Description
0521 T1015 SE Services rendered to members enrolled in a Medi-Cal
MCP
RHC and FQHC providers must use this MCP differential rate (wrap) per-visit billing code set
after billing Original Medicare MA Plan or Medicare Advantage Wrap-Around Payments
(Revenue Code 519) and Medicare Part D as applicable. This applies when services are
rendered to Medi-Cal MCP enrollees who are dually enrolled in original Medicare or a MA an
MA Plan (fee-for-service or Capitated Arrangement) and the service qualifies as a covered
RHC or FQHC visit.
The reimbursement for the billing code set is based on the Medi-Cal PPS rate currently on
file for the RHC or FQHC provider.
[[page 15]]
rural cd
15
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Billing Example
When a member has Medicare as primary insurance and a Medi-Cal MCP as secondary
insurance, the RHC and FQHC provider would bill as follows:
• Medicare
– Medicare is billed first. Medicare payments include Original Medicare, Medicare
Advantage Plan, Medicare Advantage Wrap-Around Payments (Revenue Code 519)
and Medicare Part D (where applicable)
• Medi-Cal MCP
– After Medicare pays its portion, the claim is sent to the Medi-Cal MCP for secondary
coverage
• MCP Differential Rate Payment: Submit claim to the Medi-Cal FI
• RHC and FQHC providers are entitled to the Medi-Cal PPS rate for a qualifying visit.
Medi-Cal is the payer of last resort. All third-party payers must be billed
Dual Special Needs Plans (D-SNPs)
D-SNPs are MA plans that provide specialized care to dually eligible members who have
Medicare and offer care coordination and wrap-around services. For more information, visit
the Dual Eligible Special Needs Plans in California webpage on the DHCS website.
For information on the Senior Care Action Network (SCAN) Health Plan, a Medicare
Advantage Special Needs Plan with a comprehensive risk-managed care contract to serve
the Medicare-Medi-Cal dual eligible population, refer to the MCP: Special Projects section in
the Part 1 manual.
Billing for Primary Care Services Rendered by a Medical Resident
Teaching Health Center Graduate Medical Education (THCGME) programs sponsored by
the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) or state-sponsored programs
(Primary Care Residency Programs) may seek reimbursement for primary care services
furnished by a medical resident when billed by a teaching physician. Refer to the Teaching
Health Center Graduate Medical Education (THCGME) section of the Rural Health Clinics
(RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) manual for specific reimbursement
requirements.
[[page 16]]
rural cd
16
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Special Billing Circumstances Requirements for Other Health Medi-Cal
Covered Services
This subsection provides guidance for providers on other Medi-Cal covered services that are
subject to special billing requirements and/or may have different reimbursement rates.
Dyadic Services
For billing for dyadic services, refer to the Dyadic Services and the Dyadic Services Billing
Examples for Federally Qualified Health Center and Rural Health Clinic Providers sections of
the Part 2 manual.
Justice-Involved (JI) Reentry Initiative
For billing JI services, refer to the JI Pre-Release Services, Federally Qualified Health
Centers, and Rural Health Clinic Services section of the Part 2 manual.
Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS)
Pursuant to WIC section 14132.100 (m) if the costs associated with providing SMHS are
within the RHC’s or FQHC’s per-visit PPS rate, as determined by DHCS and the RHC or
FQHC contracts with a county Mental Health Plan (MHP) for SMHS services, the SMHS
costs shall be adjusted out of the RHC’s or FQHC’s per-visit PPS rate as a change in scope
of service.
When Contracted with a County Mental Health Plan (MHP)
RHCs and FQHCs that have an active contract with a county MHP are authorized to provide
SMHS to members within that county. In these cases:
• The provider is reimbursed at the contracted rate negotiated with the county MHP. This
rate is specific to the county and may differ from standard Medi-Cal reimbursement
rates.
• Claims for SMHS are submitted through the Short-Doyle system, which is managed by
the county. Providers shall not submit claims through either the Medi Cal FI or the
Short Doyle system using RHC and FQHC specific billing code sets, including HCPCS
code T1015, legacy local codes (11, 12, 13), or any other legacy crosswalk codes or
modifiers.
[[page 17]]
rural cd
17
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
When Not Contracted with a County MHP
If an RHC or FQHC or RHC does not have a contract with the county MHP, they may still
provide emergency or isolated SMHS to Medi-Cal members under limited circumstances:
• These are one-time or urgent services provided when a member presents with a
mental health need and no immediate access to county services is available.
• The provider may submit a claim to Medi-Cal using Revenue Code 0521, and HCPCS
code T1015 with modifier SE (and should indicate an isolated or emergency visit).
• The claim is processed through the standard Medi-Cal FI and any necessary
reimbursement adjustments are made during the reconciliation process.
• After an initial emergency or isolated service, the provider is required to refer the
member back to the county MHP for ongoing or follow-up care.
• The referral must be clearly documented in the member’s medical record to ensure
compliance with all applicable Medi-Cal policy and continuity of care.
Community- Based Adult Services
For billing for Community-Based Adult Services, refer to the Community-Based Adult
Services (CBAS) (community) section of the Part 2 manual.
[[page 18]]
rural cd
18
Part 2 – Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs):
Billing Codes
Page updated: June 2026
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.