[[page 1]]
claim ub
1
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2020
The examples in this section assist providers billing for Family Planning, Access, Care and
Treatment (Family PACT) Program services on the UB-04 claim form. While Family PACT
claims are generally billed with the same method as Medi-Cal claims, there are some unique
differences for Family PACT. Providers should carefully read information in this manual
concerning Family PACT ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes and additional ICD-10-CM
documentation requirements. Refer to Benefits: Family Planning and Benefits: Family
Planning-Related Services sections of this manual for detailed policy information.
Claim Completion Instructions Overview
For general claim completion instructions, refer to the following sections in the Part 2 Medi-
Cal manual:
• Correct Coding Initiative: National
• UB-04 Completion: Outpatient Services
• UB-04 Special Billing Instructions for Outpatient Services
• UB-04 Submission and Timeliness Instructions
• UB-04 Tips for Billing: Outpatient Services
• Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC: UB-04 Billing Instructions
Claim Examples
This section includes examples of family planning and family planning-related services that
require appropriate ICD-10-CM coding for reimbursement. It also includes an example of
when two claim forms are required for the same date of service because different additional
ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes are required for treatment services provided in a single visit.
Because these claims are submitted with a diagnosis code, an ICD indicator is required in
the white space below the DX field (Box 66). An indicator is required only when an ICD-10-
CM/PCS code is entered on the claim.
Note: These are examples only. National Drug Code (NDC) numbers and charges used for
the examples may be fictitious or outdated and are not intended for use on the actual
claim form. Adapt to your billing situation.
Billing Tips When completing claims, do not enter the decimal points in any codes or dollar
amounts. If requested information does not fit neatly in the Remarks field (Box 80) of
the claim, type it on an 8½ x 11-inch sheet of paper and attach it to the claim.
[[page 2]]
claim ub
2
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Office visit, pregnancy test, symptomatic urinary tract infection (UTI)
diagnostic test and onsite dispensing
‹‹In this example, a client has an initial family planning visit at a community clinic including a
pregnancy test which was negative. The client complains of dysuria, so a point-of-care urine
dipstick (without microscopy) is done. The client receives counseling about all contraceptive
methods. The clinician dispenses 13 cycles of oral contraceptives as her primary method of
family planning, with condoms as a back-up method and 3 days of ciprofloxin tablets for a
presumptive UTI. The total time of the clinician visit is 32 minutes, including time for charting
in the medical record.
The health educator, under direct supervision of the clinician, provides individual orientation
to Family PACT, which includes information on the scope of the program, family planning
methods, and select family planning-related conditions.››
Both the product ID qualifier (N4) and National Drug Code (NDC) are required on the claim
because the oral contraceptive dispensed (claim line 4) is a “physician-administered” drug.
Providers enter the product ID qualifier/NDC number immediately followed by the unit of
measure/numeric quantity for the contraceptive in the Description field (Box 43). HCPCS
codes for contraceptive supplies are exempt from being billed in connection with an NDC.
Notes:
• Unit of measure and numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two elements will
not result in claim denial.
• Section 340B drugs may be billed on the same claim as non-340B drugs, but the 340B
drugs must include modifier UD with the applicable HCPCS and NDC codes. Refer to
the appropriate Part 2 manual section Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC: UB-04
Billing Instructions for details on NDC and 340B billing requirements.
[[page 3]]
claim ub
3
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Figure 1: Example form for office visit, pregnancy test, symptomatic urinary tract infection
(UTI) diagnostic test and onsite dispensing
‹‹ ››
As indicated in the Remarks field (Box 80) above, on an 8½ x 11-inch sheet of paper,
document the following and attach to the claim:
• L4: norgestimate and ethinyl estradiol 13 packs at $12.00 equals $156.00
• L5: ciprofloxin number 6 250 mg at $.38 equal $2.28 plus cdf at $3.00 equals $5.28
• L6: male condoms number 35 at $.28 equals $9.80 plus cdf at $.98 equals $10.78
[[page 4]]
claim ub
4
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: October 2025
Facility claim for a bilateral tubal ligation performed at a surgery center
In this example, a pregnancy test is performed onsite, followed by a tubal ligation. The
outpatient surgery center bills for supplies and the necessary treatment and recovery rooms
required for the surgery on a UB-04 claim form. (The surgeon submits a CMS-1500 claim
form.)
‹‹The referring provider must be an enrolled Family PACT provider and must ensure that the
Medi-Cal non-Family PACT rendering provider and the facility have received a copy of the
client’s Consent For Sterilization Form (DHCS 8649). A DHCS 8649 form must be attached
to the hard copy claim form by the rendering provider. Enter the referring provider’s NPI in
Box 76, and the rendering provider’s NPI in Box 77.››
Figure 2: Example of facility claim for a bilateral tubal ligation performed at a surgery center
[[page 5]]
claim ub
5
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Dispensing supplies, collection and handling of blood specimen, and
in-house lab work (an additional ICD-10-CM diagnosis code is required)
‹‹In this example, the services performed in a hospital outpatient department include an
initial visit for contraception with a complete client history, a blood pressure check and
contraceptive and sexually transmitted infection (STI) counseling. Total clinician time is 35
minutes. Point-of-care laboratory work includes a pregnancy test and dipstick urinalysis for
vague symptoms suspicious for a UTI.
To screen for HIV and syphilis a blood specimen is collected in the office and sent to an
outside laboratory. Foam, condoms and a sample pack of oral contraceptives (at no charge)
are dispensed. The client also receives a written prescription for an antibiotic for the UTI.››
The Remarks field (Box 80) must include a required statement that lists dispensed supplies
and indicates the blood specimen was sent to an unaffiliated lab.
[[page 6]]
claim ub
6
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Figure 3: Example form for dispensing supplies, collection and handling of blood specimen,
and in-house lab work
‹‹ ››
As indicated in the Remarks field (Box 80) above, on an 8½ by 11-inch sheet of paper,
document the following and attach to the claim:
• L5: foam at .21 times 30 gm equal 6.30 plus CDF .63 equals $6.93
• L4: male condoms at .28 times 20 equal $5.60 plus CDF .56 equals $6.16
[[page 7]]
claim ub
7
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2020
Outpatient facility for removal and insertion of an intrauterine device
(IUD) (client referred by a Family PACT provider)
In this example, the established client is referred by her Family PACT provider to a nearby
Medi-Cal Nurse Practitioner (NP). The NP, who works under the supervision of a physician,
removed the client’s intrauterine copper contraceptive that has been in place for 10 years.
The client has no plans for childbearing and wants a new IUD. Enter the referring provider’s
NPI in Box 76, the supervising physician’s NPI in Box 77, and enter the name of the NP,
title, and the individual NPI number in Box 80.
Both the product ID qualifier (N4) and National Drug Code (NDC) are required on the claim
because the intrauterine copper contraceptive dispensed (claim line 3) is a “physician-
administered” drug. Providers enter the product qualifier/NDC number immediately followed
by the unit of measure/numeric quantity for the contraceptive in the Description field (Box
43). (Refer to Part 2, Medi-Cal manual section Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC: UB-04
Billing Instructions for help.)
Note: Unit of measure and numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two elements
will not result in claim denial.
‹‹Figure 4: Example form for outpatient facility for removal and insertion of an
intrauterine device (IUD) ››
[[page 8]]
claim ub
8
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Contraceptive patch user with symptoms of burning upon urination, and
partner reports exposure to a sexually transmitted infection (STI) (two
claim forms required)
‹‹In this example, an established client, who is seen for a refill of contraceptive patches,
reports that she has burning upon urination and that her partner has been exposed to
chlamydia. The clinician performs a urine microscopy which shows numerous white blood
cell count (WBC) and the clinician dispenses ciprofloxin tablets to treat acute cystitis and
azithromycin 1 gram orally for presumptive treatment of a chlamydia infection. A screening
nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) for chlamydia is sent to an outside laboratory. Blood
was drawn for syphilis and HIV screening tests and sent to the same outside laboratory››.
Two claim forms are required for the same date of service, because there are two different
family planning-related conditions requiring two ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes for the two
treatments dispensed. Each claim has the same family planning ICD-10-CM diagnosis code.
Refer to the following page for the required second claim form. The office visit may not be
billed twice. The community clinic has opted to include the clinic dispensing fee in computing
costs for drugs dispensed onsite.
Figure 5: Example first form for a contraceptive patch user with symptoms of burning upon
urination, and partner reports exposure to a Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI)
‹‹ ››
[[page 9]]
claim ub
9
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2020
Contraceptive patch user with symptoms of burning upon urination, and the partner reporting
exposure to a Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI) (second claim form) (continued)
The second claim form includes the drug to treat STI exposure onsite (refer to the first claim
form on the preceding page). Both the product ID qualifier (N4) and NDC are required on the
claims.
Note: Unit of measure and numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two elements
will not result in claim denial.
‹‹Figure 6: Example second form for a contraceptive patch user with symptoms of burning
upon urination, and partner reports exposure to a Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI)››
[[page 10]]
claim ub
10
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Education and counseling visit with a Physician’s Assistant (PA)
‹‹In this example a female client who is an established depo medroxyprogesterone acetate
(DMPA) user is seen for concerns with irregular vaginal bleeding. She receives counseling
from a PA regarding the side effects of DMPA and wants to continue with the method. The
total time of the visit is 20 minutes››. This example shows how the rendering provider bills for
the procedure. The PA works under the supervision of a physician. Enter the supervising
physician’s individual NPI in Box 76, the billing Family PACT provider’s NPI in Box 77 and
the name of the PA, title and the PA’s individual NPI in Box 80.
Figure 7: Example form for education and counseling visit with a Physician’s Assistant (PA)
‹‹ ››
[[page 11]]
claim ub
11
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Intrauterine contraceptive (IUC) removal and the start of oral
contraceptives on the same date of service (two claim forms required)
In this example an established client has an expired IUC for removal and would like to start
using an oral contraceptive. ‹‹After uncomplicated removal of the IUC, the clinician provided
contraceptive counseling and prescribed and dispensed 13 cycles of oral contraceptives.
The total time of the visit (excluding the IUD removal) was 23 minutes.››
The clinician provided 15 minutes of contraceptive counseling
Two claim forms are required for the same date of service because there are two
contraceptive management ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes
Refer to the following page for the second claim form
The first claim form should include the information below. Do not bill for an Evaluation and
Management (E&M) visit with IUC removal on the same date of service
Figure 8: Example first form for Intrauterine contraceptive (IUC) removal and the start of oral
contraceptives on the same date of service
[[page 12]]
claim ub
12
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Intrauterine contraceptive (IUC) removal and the start of oral contraceptives on the same
date of service (second claim form) (continued)
The second claim form includes the oral contraceptives dispensed onsite (refer to the first
claim form on the preceding page).
Both the product ID qualifier (N4) and National Drug Code (NDC) are required on the claim
because the oral contraceptive dispensed (claim line 1) is a “physician-administered” drug.
Providers enter the product ID qualifier/NDC number immediately followed by the unit of
measure/numeric quantity for the contraceptive in the Description field (Box 43). Refer to
Part 2, Medi-Cal Manual section Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC: UB-04 Billing
Instructions for help.
Note: Unit of measure and numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two elements
will not result in claim denial.
Figure 9: Example second form for Intrauterine contraceptive (IUC) removal and the start of
oral contraceptives on the same date of service
‹‹
››
[[page 13]]
claim ub
13
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Office visit, positive sexually transmitted infections (STI) test results and
drug onsite administration
‹‹In this example, an established client who uses oral contraceptives tested positive for
syphilis (with a positive confirmatory test) at her previous family planning visit››. She
receives an intramuscular injection of penicillin G benzathine, 2,400,000 units.
Both the product ID qualifier N4 and National Drug Code (NDC) are required on the claim
because the drug dispensed (claim line 2) is a “physician-administered” drug (PAD).
Providers enter the product ID qualifier/NDC number immediately followed by the unit of
measure/numeric quantity for the drug in the Description field (Box 43). Refer to Part 2,
Medi-Cal Manual section Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC: UB-04 Billing Instructions
for help.
To calculate the charges for penicillin G benzathine, the cost of the injection and the
administration fee must be determined. The price listed on the Medi-Cal Rates page of the
Medi-Cal website for penicillin G benzathine includes a one-time administration fee. Since
the administration fee is paid only once for each drug administered, subsequent units
claimed must have the administration fee subtracted from the published rate. This difference
is the cost of the injection. Multiply this cost with the number of units. For penicillin G
benzathine, this would include the cost per unit multiplied by 23 units. To calculate the total
charge, the cost for 23 units is added to the rate of the drug on file (which includes the one-
time administration fee). Refer to the Drugs: Onsite Dispensing Billing Instructions section of
this manual for specific instructions on the one-time administration fee.
Note: Unit of measure and numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two elements
will not result in claim denial.
[[page 14]]
claim ub
14
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Figure 10: Example form for office visit, positive STI test results and drug onsite
administration
‹‹ ››
[[page 15]]
claim ub
15
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page updated: September 2021
Initial visit with on-site dispensing of diaphragm (wide seal)
‹‹In this example, the services of a hospital outpatient department include an initial visit for
contraception with a complete client history and counseling. The point-of-care pregnancy
test is clinically indicated and is negative. Contraceptive diaphragm (wide seal), condoms
and jelly were dispensed on-site. Total clinician time is 35 minutes.››
The Remarks field (Box 80) must include a required statement that lists dispensed supplies.
Figure 11: Example form for Initial visit with on-site dispensing of diaphragm (wide seal)
In the Remarks field (box 80) above, or on an 8.5 by 11-inch sheet of paper, document the
following and attach to the claim:
• L3: Diaphragm Wide Seal at 43.05 times 1 equals $43.05 plus CDF 4.30 equals
$47.35
• L4: Male Condoms at .28 times 20 equals $5.60 plus CDF .56 equals $6.16
• L5: ‹‹Jelly›› at .21 times 30 gm equals $6.30 plus CDF .63 equals $6.93
[[page 16]]
claim ub
16
Family PACT – Claim Completion: UB-04
Page last updated: September 2020
‹‹Legend››
‹‹Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.››
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.