[[page 1]]
fam
1
Family PACT – Family PACT Program Overview
Family PACT Program Overview
Page updated: May 2024
This section includes an overview of the Family PACT (Planning, Access, Care and
Treatment) Program.
Comprehensive Family Planning Services
Family PACT is a comprehensive family planning services program. It is comprehensive
because it includes contraceptive methods and family planning-related services, together
with client-centered health education and counseling.
Family PACT Program Standards
The Program Standards section in this manual defines the scope, type and quality of this
program, and the terms and conditions under which the services will be reimbursed. The
seven standards address the following:
• Informed consent
• Confidentiality
• Cultural and linguistic competency
• Access to care
• Availability of covered services
• Clinical and preventive services
• Education and counseling services
[[page 2]]
fam
2
Family PACT – Family PACT Program Overview
Page updated: May 2024
Scope of Services
‹‹All services for Family PACT, as identified in this manual, are eligible for reimbursement by
the program.›› Services that exceed the limitations noted, but are related to the services of
the Family PACT program, may be covered with an approved Treatment Authorization
Request (TAR) documenting the medical necessity. For more information, refer to the
Treatment Authorization Request (TAR) section in this manual. There is client-centered
health education and counseling throughout all of these services.
Family planning services include all contraceptive methods, fertility awareness, female and
male sterilization and include specified reproductive health screening tests.
Family planning-related services include treatment of specified sexually transmitted
infections (STIs). In addition, the program covers urinary tract infections (UTIs), and
screening for cervical cancer and treatment of pre-invasive cervical lesions for women when
the care is provided coincident to a visit for the management of a family planning method.
Lastly, there are benefits for managing complications of contraceptive methods and
complications arising from treatment of covered family planning-related services.
Clinical and Preventive Services
Family PACT services are for specific contraceptive methods and family planning-related
services. Clinical and preventive services include office visits, procedures, drugs and
contraceptive supplies.
• Family planning services (refer to the Benefits: Family Planning section)
• Family planning-related services (refer to the Benefits: Family Planning-Related
Services section)
• Interventions for management of complications of contraceptive methods or treatment
of covered family planning-related services (refer to the Benefits: Family Planning and
Benefits: Family Planning-Related Services sections
[[page 3]]
fam
3
Family PACT – Family PACT Program Overview
Page updated: May 2024
Education and Counseling
Client-centered health education and counseling is considered integral to Family PACT and
must be incorporated throughout the family planning visit. Regardless of the type of visit,
provision of reproductive health education and counseling is required for all Family PACT
clients, including the following:
• A practice setting that is appropriate for discussion of sensitive topics
• Ongoing individualized client assessment and focused communication
• Topics and behaviors that promote personal choice, risk reduction and optimal
reproductive health practices
Excluded Services
Family PACT does not cover the following services:
• ‹‹Pregnancy care, other than the diagnosis of pregnancy and the required counseling
about options: prenatal, perinatal care, or any services for pregnant clients››
• Infertility diagnosis and treatment, except fertility awareness
• HIV or hepatitis treatment
• Hepatitis B immunization and Hepatitis B laboratory testing
• Screening mammograms
• Services beyond the scope of Family PACT
• ‹‹Abortion services, or services ancillary to abortions. The global postoperative period
for abortions has been defined as 21 days for Medi-Cal. Office visits are not covered
by Family PACT during this period.
Contraceptive supplies, devices and intrauterine contraceptive (IUC) insertions, including
devices and IUCs insertions provided inpatient, are Family PACT benefits when provided
immediately after an abortion and are not considered services ancillary to abortion.
Contraceptives are reimbursed by Family PACT as long as all eligibility criteria, including
Other Health Coverage (OHC), are met and the client is certified as eligible after the
abortion. A Treatment Authorization Request is not required.››
[[page 4]]
fam
4
Family PACT – Family PACT Program Overview
Page updated: January 2025
Fiscal Intermediary (FI)
The Fiscal Intermediary (FI) support for Family PACT providers doing business with
Medi-Cal, includes the following:
• Telephone Service Center (TSC) at 1-800-541-5555 for program information, including
billing questions, form requests and referrals to regional representatives.
• Regional representatives available for clarification of program policies and claims
submission.
• All existing Medi-Cal help lines (refer to the Provider Relations Directory section in the
Part 1 Medi-Cal provider manual).
• Family PACT providers doing business with Medi-Cal Rx should refer to the Medi-Cal
Rx website for a comprehensive list of support resources.
Billing and Reimbursement
Unless otherwise stated in this manual, the Family PACT Program defers to Medi-Cal
policies, codes and claim submission procedures. For onsite claim completion examples,
refer to the Claim Completion: CMS-1500 and Claim Completion: UB-04 sections in this
manual. For pharmacy claim completion examples, refer to the Medi-Cal Rx website. All
providers, including Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), Indian Health Centers
(IHCs) and Rural Health Clinics (RHCs), bill fee-for-service. Providers are reimbursed
according to Medi-Cal policy, unless stated otherwise by the Family PACT Program. Claims
are subject to all Medi-Cal timeliness guidelines.
Medi-Cal Forms Required for Billing and Treatment Authorization
Requests (TARs)
Unless specified otherwise, standard Medi-Cal forms are used to bill Family PACT services
or to seek authorization requests. These forms include the CMS-1500 claim form, UB-04
claim form, Treatment Authorization Request (TAR), Claims Inquiry Form (CIF) and the
Appeal Form (90-1). Other forms must not be substituted by a provider.
For pharmacy claim forms and authorization requests, refer to the Medi-Cal Rx website.
Payer of Last Resort
Family PACT is considered the payer of last resort. That is, the provider generally must bill
the client’s OHC and any other source of reimbursement rather than enrolling the client in
Family PACT. For more information, refer to the Client Eligibility section in this manual.
[[page 5]]
fam
5
Family PACT – Family PACT Program Overview
Page updated: May 2024
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.