[[page 1]]
0B hw to use
1
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
How to Use This Manual
Page updated: May 2025
This section explains the following components of the Medi-Cal and Specialty Program
provider manuals:
• Manual organization
• Navigation tools
• Manual section elements
• How and when the manual is updated
• Provider inquiries/comments
Manual Organization
The provider manual is structured into multiple parts customized to meet individual provider
needs. The parts are designed to form an ideal working set of manuals that includes:
• Part 1 – Medi-Cal Program and Eligibility
• Part 2 – Medi-Cal Billing and Policy
• Specialty Program Manuals
A complete manual will include both Part 1, Part 2 and Specialty Programs Manuals.
Additionally, each part is split into manual sections that assemble policy by similar topics to
help specific communities of providers navigate easier. There are currently 25 complete Part
2 provider manuals.
Each provider manual is a part of a larger provider “umbrella,” which can assist providers
find which manual they should refer to based on which claim form(s) they traditionally use.
‹‹See the “Navigating Medi-Cal and Specialty Health Programs” chart on the Medi-Cal
Provider website for more information about the correlation between claim forms and
umbrellas.››
[[page 2]]
0B hw to use
2
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: January 2024
Allied Health Community
• Acupuncture Manual
• Audiology and Hearing Aids Manual
• Chiropractic Manual
• Durable Medical Equipment and Medical Supplies Manual
• Medical Transportation Manual
• Orthotics and Prosthetics Manual
• Psychological Services Manual
• Therapies Manual
Inpatient/Outpatient Community
• Inpatient Services Manual
• ‹‹Medi-Cal Waiver Program Manual››
• Clinics and Hospitals Manual
• Chronic Dialysis Clinics Manual
• Community–Based Adult Services Manual
• Heroin Detoxification Manual
• Home Health Agencies/Home and Community-Based Services Manual
• Hospice Care Program Manual
• Local Educational Agency Manual
• Multipurpose Senior Services Program Manual
• Rehabilitation Clinics Manual
Long Term Care Community
• Long Term Care Manual
Medical Services Community
• General Medicine Manual
• Obstetrics Manual
[[page 3]]
0B hw to use
3
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Pharmacy Community
• Pharmacy Manual
Vision Care Community
• Vision Care Manual
Specialty Programs
• Family PACT Manual
Part 1 – Medi-Cal Program and Eligibility
Part 1 – Medi-Cal Program and Eligibility is an orientation to Medi-Cal services, programs
and claim reimbursement. It provides information about recipient eligibility and provider
participation. Each provider manual has the same Part 1 since the information therein is
applicable to all providers.
Part 2 – Medi-Cal Billing and Policy
Part 2 – Medi-Cal Billing and Policy contains specific program policies, code lists, and claim
form billing and follow-up instructions related to individual provider communities. While
Part 1 of the provider manual is applicable to all provider communities, the Part 2 of the
provider manual will be different for every provider community.
Note: There may be some manual sections that are shared amongst several provider
communities, but an Acupuncture provider will find all the information they need on
billing, specific program policies and follow-up instructions, in the Acupuncture Part 2
provider manual. In contrast, an Obstetrics provider will find all of their information in
the Obstetrics Part 2 provider manual.
Again, Part 1 offers orientation information to providers regarding Medi-Cal. Part 2 describes
specific billing policy by billing code, procedure, or service.
Specialty Program Manuals
The Family PACT Policies, Procedures and Billing Instructions (PPBI) manual is a specialty
program manual that includes specific policy, eligibility requirements, code lists, and claim
form completion instructions pertaining to the Family PACT program. This manual works
together with the Medi-Cal Part 1 and Part 2 manuals, and a Family PACT provider may
need to refer to a specific Part 2 provider manual in addition to the Family PACT manual for
comprehensive insight into the billing policy in question.
[[page 4]]
0B hw to use
4
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Which Manual Do I Need?
Use Part 1 – Medi-Cal Program and Eligibility, for general Medi-Cal information, such as
learning who is eligible for Medi-Cal services and what programs Medi-Cal administers. Use
Part 2 – Medi-Cal Billing and Policy, and the Family PACT program manual for your
day-to-day billing needs, such as learning about authorization and billing for specific services
or procedure codes. In some cases, you may need all three manuals to research a particular
area or question.
Navigation Tools
The following navigation tools will help navigate and fine information in the manuals:
• Locator keys
• Page numbering system
Locator Keys
Each manual section has a locator key, which is an abbreviated form of the section’s title
and is located at the top right corner of each page. Locator keys function as section names
and can assist when searching and organizing sections (see Figure 1).
Figure 1: An example of locator key in the top right corner. A locator key is an abbreviated
version of the full title. In this case, “prov guide” is the locator key for the manual section
“Provider Guidelines.”
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system uses the section locator key and the page number. For
example, in the Provider Guidelines section, the topic “How to Enroll” is on page one. The
complete page reference for this topic would be prov guide 1 (see Figure 2).
[[page 5]]
0B hw to use
5
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Manual Section Elements
Provider manual sections include basic document elements:
• Page Header, which includes:
– Locator Key
– Page Number
Figure 2: Example of a locator key and page number.
• Section Title, which is located on the first page of every manual section.
Figure 3: Example of a section title.
• Page Updated, which is located at the very top of every page, and details when the
page was last edited. A manual section can have multiple “Page Updated” dates
throughout the section.
– For example: Page 5 can list October 2020, while page 6 can list August 2020. This
information is made available to contextualize what is new in a document since a
reader last engaged with it.
Figure 4: Example of a “page updated.”
• Heading Levels: Manual sections have a hierarchy of knowledge that can be viewed
visually via the format of the text, or both visually and non-visually via the bookmarks.
For visual readers relying on the format of the text, the hierarchy is as follows:
– Level 1: Text is bold and underlined
– Level 2: Text is bold
– Level 3: Text is underlined
– Level 4: Text is neither bold nor underlined
[[page 6]]
0B hw to use
6
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Figure 5: Example of the various heading levels.
• Page Footer, which includes Manual Part Number and Section Title
Figure 6: Example of the manual section page footer.
[[page 7]]
0B hw to use
7
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
• Legend, which is located on the last page of every manual section and will contain
footnotes to symbols or references made earlier in the manual section.
Figure 7: Example of the Legend that is located at the end of every manual section.
• Change Brackets, which will be located throughout the section at variable intervals.
These brackets enclose content that has been changed as of the date listed as the
page updated date.
– For example: Page 5 has a certain paragraph bracketed. The “Page Updated”
element lists “August 2020.” This means that that paragraph was updated in some
way as part of the August 2020 publication.
• If no change brackets are present, this means the content on the page has shifted in
some manner as of the date listed in the page updated element, but ultimately no new
policy changes were introduced on that page.
[[page 8]]
0B hw to use
8
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Figure 8: An example of a manual section with locator key, title, page number page
updated and various heading levels.
[[page 9]]
0B hw to use
9
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
How and When Provider Manuals are Updated
Manual pages in the provider manual are updated through the following online resources:
• Medi-Cal Update bulletins
• How to Tell the Manual Has Been Updated in the Bulletins
• How to Find Page Updates in a Manual Section
Medi-Cal Update Bulletins
The Medi-Cal Update bulletins and the Family PACT Policies, Procedures and Billing
Instructions (PPBI) manual and monthly program bulletin are delivered online via the
Medi-Cal Provider website, and contain articles with the latest program, policy and billing
information and links to all provider manual updates that occurred because of these
program, policy and billing updates.
Currently the Medi-Cal Update bulletins release on:
• The general release occurs on the 16th of every month or the business day before.
• The Pharmacy Priority release occurs on the last business day of the month.
How to Tell the Manual Has Been Updated in the Bulletins
The provider manual is not updated outside of the Medi-Cal Bulletins.
If a manual section is updated as part of a policy change described in the Medi-Cal Updates,
there will be a table at the end of every article describing what provider manual, provider
manual section, and page were updated as a part of the policy change.
Additionally, if applicable, at the end of every bulletin is an article titled “Provider Manual
Revisions,” which lists manual sections and pages that were updated during that Medi-Cal
Update that had no accompanying bulletin article.
How to Find Page Updates in a Manual Section
New or Changed Text: When a page is updated, new or revised text is identified by a
change bracket.
Text Deletions
Generally, when information is deleted from a page, only the “page updated” date is
changed. However, if a deletion significantly alters the meaning of the text, a change bracket
is added around the surrounding text where the deleted text previously existed, as a
reminder to review the information.
[[page 10]]
0B hw to use
10
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Figure 9: An example of a manual section page with “page updated” but no change
brackets.
[[page 11]]
0B hw to use
11
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Figure 10: Example of a manual section before deletions were applied.
Figure 11: Example of manual section after deletion with change brackets applied.
[[page 12]]
0B hw to use
12
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
Provider Inquiries
If a provider is interested in contacting Medi-Cal with questions about how to access or use
the provider manual, they can contact the Telephone Service Center (TSC). For information
about TSC and for a description of the billing and training assistance available to providers,
please refer to the Provider Relations Directory section in the Part 1 manual.
[[page 13]]
0B hw to use
13
Part 1 – How to Use This Manual
Page updated: September 2020
‹‹Legend››
‹‹Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.››
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.