News and Updates Archive | California Family PACT Skip to content Important Are you enrolled in
Medi-Cal? Has your contact information changed in the past two years? Give your local county office
your updated contact information so you can stay enrolled. Find your local county office . Home
Online Training Center Find Providers Search submit Close Search Select Page Clients Which Birth
Control Method is Right for Me? Get To Know the Family PACT Program Am I Eligible? How to Become a
Family PACT Client Services Covered Client Videos Providers Eligibility Enrollment Upcoming Training
Events Quick Reference Guides FAQs Forms Clinical Resources PPBI Forms Program Annual Reports
Clinical Practice Alerts Clinical Webinars Webinar Archive Client Education Materials Order Client
Education Materials Policy and Updates Medi-Cal and Other Resources Family PACT Quarterly
Newsletters Selected Family PACT Metrics Dashboard Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CA
Department of Public Health Provider Consult Resources Quick Reference Guides About Us About Us
Family PACT: An Overview Contact Us Family PACT Portal Portal Resources News and Updates Archive
Search Family PACT Policy Updates and Clarifications July 16, 2026 As announced in the July 2026
DHCS Bulletin, effective July 1, 2026, the Office of Family Planning (OFP) has updated the Family
PACT Policies, Procedures, and Billing Instructions (PPBI) Manual regarding required trainings,
contraceptive requirements, and non-physician medical practitioners. Required Training Update Course
Catalog Updates Contraceptive Requirement Clarifications Non-Physician Medical Practitioners (NMPs)
Update Planned Family PACT Portal Production Outage: June 6-8, 2026 June 3, 2026 The Department of
Health Care Services (DHCS) will perform a system update to the Family PACT Portal beginning on
12:00 a.m. on Saturday, June 6 through Monday, June 8, 2026, at 6 a.m. During this time, the Family
PACT Portal will be unavailable to clients, providers, and DHCS staff. Providers affected by this
outage should continue… Family PACT Telehealth Policy Update April 22, 2026 The Department of Health
Care Services (DHCS) published revisions to the telehealth policy for the Family PACT Program. The
policy has been updated to include: Providers who offer Family PACT covered benefits and services
via telehealth modalities must offer Family PACT clients the choice between telehealth modalities
and the ability to opt for in-person services,… Planned Family PACT Portal Production Outage: April
17-19, 2026 April 17, 2026 The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) will perform a system
update to the Family PACT Portal beginning on 10:00 p.m. on Friday, April 17 through Sunday, April
19, 2026. During this time, the Family PACT Portal will be unavailable to clients, providers, and
DHCS staff. Providers affected by this outage should continue determining eligibility using the
Client Eligibility… Planned Family PACT Portal Production Outage: April 3-5, 2026 April 3, 2026 The
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) will perform a system update to the Family PACT Portal
beginning on 10:00 p.m. Friday, April 3 through Sunday, April 5, 2026. During this time, the Family
PACT Portal will be unavailable to clients, providers, and DHCS staff. Providers affected by this
outage should continue determining eligibility using the Client Eligibility Certification… FDA
Approves Updated Nexplanon Label and Launches New REMS February 25, 2026 Effective January 16, 2026,
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the Supplemental New Drug Application
(sNDA) for Nexplanon (68 mg etonogestrel implant), extending its approved use from 3 years to up to
5 years for pregnancy prevention. All clinicians performing Nexplanon insertions or removals must
now complete FDA-required Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) certification.… Planned
Family PACT Portal Production Outage February 19, 2026 The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS)
periodically performs system updates to the Family PACT Portal. During these maintenance periods,
the portal may be temporarily unavailable to clients, providers, and DHCS staff. Providers affected
by this outage should continue enrolling and reaffirming clients using the Client Eligibility
Certification (CEC) paper form and provide services as usual. To… Action Required: Reaffirm Client
Eligibility at Every Visit Using the Family PACT Portal February 13, 2026 Providers are required to
reaffirm client eligibility during each visit to confirm a client’s current eligibility status has
not changed, as stated in the Family PACT Policies, Procedures and Billing Instructions Manual
(PPBI); Client Eligibility (client elig) section. Follow these steps to reaffirm client eligibility
on the Family PACT Portal. DHCS 4475 Update February 12, 2026 On February 10, 2026, the Department
of Health Care Services (DHCS) Office of Family Planning published the updated version of the Site
Certifier for Multiple Service Locations Declaration (DHCS 4475). This form is used to request DHCS
approval for one site certifier to oversee up to 10 service locations for designated clinic types
specified in the Provider… One Site Certifier for Multiple Service Locations Update February 11,
2026 On October 16, 2025, the Department of Health Care Services published updated policy to the
Family Planning, Access, Care, and Treatment (Family PACT) program implementing Senate Bill 1131,
allowing one site certifier to oversee up to ten service locations for the designated clinic types
specified in Family PACT Policies, Procedures, and Billing Instructions Manual, Provider Enrollment
and… Providers - sign up to be informed of our latest trainings and updates Subscribe View this
site's Accessibility Certificate © 2026 Family PACT | All Rights Reserved. We use cookies to ensure
that we give you the best experience on our website. Please accept or decline cookies. Accept
Decline