[[page 1]]
hap id
1
Family PACT – Health Access Programs (HAP) Identification Number
‹‹Health Access Programs (HAP) Identification Number
Page updated: January 2025
The following section contains information about the requirements pertaining to Health
Access Programs (HAP) Identification Number. Additionally, this section includes information
with regards to the requirements for using the Family Planning, Access, Care and Treatment
Program (Family PACT) Portal activation system, recertification, eligibility deactivation and
provider responsibilities.
Family PACT Portal Eligibility System
The Family PACT Portal is a unique California Healthcare Eligibility, Enrollment, and
Retention System (CalHEERS) project that is a part of the CalHEERS ecosystem. Providers
use the Family PACT Portal client enrollment system for certifying clients as eligible and for
activating the client’s HAP Identification Number. The Family PACT Portal allows providers
to activate, inquire, update, recertify, and deactivate client eligibility.
The Family PACT Portal consists of the Client portal, the Provider portal, and the Admin
portal. The portals are designed to streamline Family PACT account, application, and
eligibility processes for impacted system end-users.
• The Client portal will facilitate efficient management for applicants/clients by allowing
them to create an account, apply for, and oversee their Family PACT enrollment easily
online.
• The Provider portal will allow Family PACT providers to enroll and recertify
applicants/clients into Family PACT.
• The Admin portal will allow the Office of Family Planning staff to assist providers and
clients with account, application, and eligibility and will allow Covered California
Service Center Representatives to assist with some specific account support items.
Provider Access to Family PACT Portal
Upon enrollment into the Family PACT Program, the site certifier identified on the PAVE
application will be emailed access to the Family PACT Portal.
HAP Identification Number
The following list details the HAP Identification Number data elements collected from the
CEC form (DHCS 4461):
• Medi-Cal card number
• Medi-Cal card number issue date (optional)››
[[page 2]]
hap id
2
Family PACT – Health Access Programs (HAP) Identification Number
Page updated: January 2025
• ‹‹Barrier to access indicator (optional)
• Client name (first, middle, last and suffix)
• Client address (home or mailing, street, city, state, ZIP code)
• Client date of birth
• Gender and sexual orientation
• Birth certificate sex
• Social Security Number
• Marital status
• Other health coverage
• Client contact information and contact type
• County of residence
• Race/Ethnicity
• Primary language
• Certification date
• Family size
• Total taxable monthly family income
The provider’s claim, as well as claims from any other providers, including other rendering
providers, pharmacies or laboratories, will be denied if the HAP Identification Number is not
activated. Each Family PACT client should have only one HAP Identification Number. HAP
Identification Numbers should not be reissued to another client. A provider issuing a
deactivated or previously issued HAP Identification Number to another client will be
disenrolled from the program.
A copy of the client's HAP Identification Number can be viewed, saved as a PDF, and/or
printed via the Client Information page of the Family PACT Portal.››
Failure to adhere to program policies will result in the provider being disenrolled from the
program.
[[page 3]]
hap id
3
Family PACT – Health Access Programs (HAP) Identification Number
Page updated: June 2025
The following is an example of the front and back sides of a HAP Identification Number:
Figure 1: Front and back sides of a HAP Identification Number
HAP Identification Number Activation
‹‹The Family PACT provider (or his/her designee) must activate the HAP Identification
Number via the Family PACT Portal. Activation for new clients must be on the day they are
determined eligible for Family PACT service.››
The HAP Identification Number must be activated to obtain reimbursement for Family PACT
services. Providers who neglect to activate a HAP Identification Number upon certification of
a client are responsible for covered services rendered. Pharmacy, laboratory or clinical
providers to whom the client is referred will not be able to receive reimbursement until the
HAP Identification Number is activated. Clients must not be charged for Family PACT
services after certification is complete.
‹‹At the time of enrollment, providers must inform clients that their HAP Identification
Number may be used immediately to access Family PACT covered services. Clients must
also be advised that they may obtain services from any enrolled Family PACT provider
statewide regardless of where they enrolled. This requirement supports client awareness
and promotes timely access to reproductive health care services.››
Confirming Eligibility
When confirming via the Family PACT Portal that a client is currently eligible for Family PACT
Program benefits, the provider will receive the message that the client is eligible for Family
PACT services with aid code 8H, unless the client has been deactivated. Any changes
affecting eligibility must be addressed at each visit. Providers are required to inquire if there
have been any changes that may affect eligibility such as income, family size or the
acquisition of other health coverage.
[[page 4]]
hap id
4
Family PACT – Health Access Programs (HAP) Identification Number
Page updated: June 2025
Provider Service Site
‹‹Activation of the HAP Identification Number must occur exclusively at the service location
(enrolled address) represented by the enrolled Family PACT provider NPI. A HAP
Identification Number may not be issued or activated at health fairs, outreach events or
anywhere other than the enrolled service location. Failure to adhere to this policy will result
in disenrollment from the Family PACT Program››.
HAP Identification Number Deactivation
Any changes affecting eligibility must be addressed at each visit. If the provider determines
that the client is no longer eligible for Family PACT services, the provider must deactivate
the client’s Family PACT certification. Select the “discontinue” option to deactivate a client’s
Identification Number in the Family PACT Portal, indicate the reason for deactivation and
refrain from billing Family PACT for services. A previously deactivated HAP Identification
Number shall not be reactivated under another client. A provider issuing a deactivated HAP
Identification Number to another client will be disenrolled from the program.
For information about client deactivation codes, refer to “Client Eligibility Certification Codes”
in the Client Eligibility section in this manual. The deactivation codes are listed at the end of
the CEC codes chart
Deactivation For Pregnancy
If the client is determined to be pregnant, the client is no longer eligible for Family PACT
services. The client should be referred to Medi-Cal, Covered California and/or any other
public health insurance program for which they might be eligible. The HAP Identification
Number must be deactivated using deactivation code “05” on the day following the visit the
diagnosis of pregnancy was determined. The HAP Identification Number may be retained in
the client’s file for possible future use by the client. Clients who become ineligible due to
pregnancy may be recertified when they are no longer pregnant.
Deactivation After Sterilization Services
Clients who undergo permanent sterilization are no longer eligible for Family PACT services
and the HAP Identification Number must be deactivated using deactivation code “03.”
[[page 5]]
hap id
5
Family PACT – Health Access Programs (HAP) Identification Number
Page updated: January 2025
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.