[[page 1]]
pharm
1
Family PACT – Pharmacy Billing Overview
Pharmacy Billing Overview
Page updated: December 2021
This section is a Family Planning, Access, Care and Treatment (Family PACT) Program
billing overview for pharmacy providers only. ‹‹For a list of reimbursable drugs and
contraceptive supplies dispensed by pharmacies, refer to the Family PACT Pharmacy
Formulary on the Medi-Cal Rx website (https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov).››
Pharmacy Dispensing
‹‹Medi-Cal pharmacy providers may bill Family PACT for FDA-approved drugs and medical
supplies that are included in the Family PACT Pharmacy Formulary on the Medi-Cal Rx
website (https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov/) and are prescribed by an enrolled Family PACT
provider or associated practitioner.››
No Enrollment Necessary for Medi-Cal Pharmacy Providers
Medi-Cal pharmacy providers are not required to enroll in the Family PACT Program.
In addition, pharmacy providers are not required to attend a Provider Orientation in order to
be reimbursed for services rendered to Family PACT clients.
‹‹Medi-Cal Rx Claims Submission
Pharmacies should submit claims to Medi-Cal Rx for all Family PACT drug and
contraceptive supply billing transactions.››
Reimbursement Rate
The reimbursement rates for Family PACT drugs and contraceptive supplies dispensed at
pharmacies are the same as those for the Medi-Cal program.
No Charge to Clients
Pharmacy providers may not request a copayment, donation or other amount in conjunction
with provision of services to Family PACT clients.
[[page 2]]
pharm
2
Family PACT – Pharmacy Billing Overview
Page updated: April 2023
Codes for Contraceptives
Pharmacists must bill the following contraceptive supplies using a National Drug Code
(NDC), Universal Product Code (UPC) or Health Related Items (HRI) number:
• Condoms (internal and male)
• Diaphragms
• Cervical caps
• Basal thermometers
• Lubricating jelly
• Spermicides and vaginal films
Treatment Authorization Request
‹‹All drugs to manage a complication of a Family PACT benefit require authorization using a
Treatment Authorization Request (TAR). Drugs needed to treat complications are limited to
drugs and supplies identified in the Family PACT Pharmacy Formulary on the Medi-Cal Rx
website (https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov/), and the Clinic Formulary sections in this manual.››
For authorization information for pharmacies, refer to the Family PACT Pharmacy Formulary
on the Medi-Cal Rx website (https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov/).
For general Family PACT-related TAR information, refer to the Treatment Authorization
Request (TAR) section in this manual.
Use of Authorized Labelers
For the list of current authorized labelers, refer to the Medi-Cal Rx Contract Drugs List –
Authorized Drug Manufacturer Labeler Codes section of the Contract Drugs List on the
Medi-Cal Rx website (https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov).
Pharmacist Services
This heading provides information on pharmacist services policy and billing for pharmacy
providers who are enrolled in Medi-Cal and participate in the delivery of pharmacist services
authorized pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I Code), Section 14132.968. The
services include, among other things, furnishing self-administered hormonal contraception.
Furnishing Pharmacist
Furnishing pharmacists (the pharmacist ordering the medication) must be enrolled as an
ordering, referring and prescribing (ORP) provider for claims to be reimbursed. Applications
are available on the Medi-Cal website: www.medi-cal.ca.gov.
[[page 3]]
pharm
3
Family PACT – Pharmacy Billing Overview
Page updated: October 2022
A pharmacist may furnish self-administered hormonal contraception pursuant to Business
and Professions Code (B&P Code), Section 4052.3. The furnishing pharmacist must follow
the standardized protocols promulgated in California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 16,
Section 1746.1, that includes, but is not limited to, the following:
• The ordering pharmacist must be qualified to furnish self-administered hormonal
contraception pursuant to the Board of Pharmacy Regulation.
• Proof of successful completion of training must be retained onsite for auditing
purposes.
• The pharmacy must retain proper records.
Refer to “Documentation Requirements” for additional information
The following CPT® codes and corresponding ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes must be used by
the pharmacy to bill for the furnishing of self-administered hormonal contraception:
‹‹CPT and ICD-10-CM Codes Table››
CPT Code Use when billing for ICD-10-CM Diagnosis Codes
99202 New patient Z30.011, Z30.012, Z30.015, Z30.016,
Z30.09, Z30.41, Z30.44 and Z30.45
99212 Established patient Z30.011, Z30.012, Z30.015, Z30.016,
Z30.09, Z30.41, Z30.44 and Z30.45
New Patient
A new patient is one who has not received any professional services from the pharmacy
within the past three years. If a new patient visit has been reimbursed, any subsequent claim
for a new patient service by the same provider, for the same patient, received within three
years, will be reimbursed at the level of the comparable established patient procedure.
Established Patient
An established patient is one who has received applicable professional services from a
pharmacist at the same pharmacy location within the past three years.
Determination of new or established patient status is based on the owner of the medical
record, which is generally the pharmacy and not the individual pharmacist providing the
service at the time.
ICD-10-CM Diagnosis Codes
ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes that relate to family planning services are listed in the
Benefits: Family Planning section of this manual.
[[page 4]]
pharm
4
Family PACT – Pharmacy Billing Overview
Page updated: August 2020
Documentation Requirements
Providers are required to retain documentation for all pharmacist evaluation and
management services. All providers should be aware that if the service is not documented,
the service is not considered to have been provided.
Medical record documentation is required to record an individual’s applicable health history
including applicable past and present illnesses, self-screening questionnaires, tests,
treatments and outcomes. The medical record chronologically documents the care of the
patient and is an important element that contributes to high quality care.
An appropriately documented medical record may serve as a legal document to verify the
care provided. Documentation should be complete, legible and concise. At a minimum, the
records must include the following:
• Regulation-required questionnaire
• Reason for encounter
• Appropriateness of therapeutic services provided
• Applicable test results (blood pressure/pulse)
• Client’s relevant medical history
• Site of service
• Total time spent with client and time spent on counseling, if applicable
• Date, time of service and identity of pharmacist providing the service
• Action taken as a result of the encounter
CMS-1500 Claim Form Example
For a claim form example, refer to the Claim Completion: CMS-1500 section in this manual.
[[page 5]]
pharm
5
Family PACT – Pharmacy Billing Overview
Page updated: August 2020
‹‹Legend››
‹‹Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.››
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.