[[page 1]]
radi
1
Family PACT – Radiology Services
Radiology Services
Page updated: August 2020
Radiology services are covered by the Family PACT (Planning, Access, Care and
Treatment) Program when the services are ordered during a family planning visit and are
medically appropriate for preoperative evaluation, method surveillance and complication
management. For a list of covered radiology services and restrictions that may apply, refer
to the Benefits: Family Planning and Benefits: Family Planning-Related Services sections
in this manual.
Referral Required
Providers may bill for radiology procedures if the procedures are ordered by a Family PACT
provider, a Medi-Cal provider or their associated practitioners.
ICD-10-CM Code Required on Claims
Claims for radiology services must include an ICD-10-CM code for family planning services.
A second diagnosis code is required when billing for a complication of a covered family
planning method and follow-up testing for hysteroscopic sterilization. For additional
information, refer to the Benefits: Family Planning section in this manual. Ordering
clinicians are instructed to include applicable ICD-10-CM codes on the radiology requisition
form. Radiologists should contact the referring clinician if this information is missing.
Claim Form Completion
Family PACT is a state program, separate from Medi-Cal; however, Family PACT providers
submit claims using the Medi-Cal claims processing system. The same claim types used to
submit Medi-Cal claims, such as the CMS-1500, UB-04 or electronic transactions are used
to bill Family PACT claims. For more information, refer to the Claim Completion: CMS-1500
or Claim Completion: UB-04 sections in this manual.
[[page 2]]
radi
2
Family PACT – Radiology Services
Page updated: August 2020
‹‹Legend››
‹‹Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.››
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.