[[page 1]]
ben clinic
1
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: August 2023
‹‹This section is an overview of the clinical services available to clients in the Family
Planning, Access, Care and Treatment (Family PACT) Program. Family PACT services are
designed to support contraceptive methods for women and men, as gender appropriate, by
assisting individuals who have a medical necessity for family planning services. For
purposes of Family PACT, medical necessity for family planning services means the ability
to become pregnant or cause a pregnancy.››
Secondarily, Family PACT includes assistance with family planning-related services to
achieve and maintain optimal reproductive health.
There are two categories of services available in the program: Family planning services and
family planning-related services for specified reproductive health conditions.
Family Planning Services
Family planning services are those relevant to the use of contraceptive methods and include
specified reproductive health screening tests. These include the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved contraceptive methods, emergency contraceptives, office
visits and interventions for the management of complications that arise from the use of
covered contraceptive methods. Some services have restrictions associated with gender
and age. Refer to the Benefits: Family Planning section in this manual for a complete listing
of services and associated restrictions.
ICD-10-CM Diagnosis Codes
An ICD-10-CM diagnosis code related to the items in the preceding paragraph is required for
billing. ICD-10-CM codes that relate to family planning services are listed in the Benefits:
Family Planning section of this manual.
[[page 2]]
ben clinic
2
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: June 2022
Laboratory
Family planning services include laboratory tests specific to each contraceptive method.
These tests may be indicated on a case-by-case basis to determine whether a client can
safely use a particular contraceptive method and are not intended to be routinely ordered for
all clients. Certain restrictions may apply and are noted. In accordance with program
standards, tests performed when “medically indicated in the context of provision of
contraceptive services or required by an outpatient facility” require justification for ordering to
be documented in the client’s medical record. For more information, refer to the Benefits:
Family Planning section in this manual.
Laboratory tests performed in a provider’s office or clinical laboratory for Family PACT
clients are billed using standard CPT® codes and modifiers. For more information, refer to
the Modifiers: Approved List and Pathology: Billing and Modifiers sections in the appropriate
Part 2 Medi-Cal manual.
While the definition of certain CPT codes includes testing for multiple pathogens, only the
laboratory tests to detect the specific pathogens listed in this manual are considered Family
PACT benefits.
For a comprehensive listing of reimbursable laboratory tests, descriptions and restrictions,
refer to the Laboratory Services section in this manual.
Providers must have the appropriate Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment (CLIA)
certification on file with the Department of Health Care Services Provider Enrollment Division
for the tests performed in the office. For more information, refer to the Pathology: An
Overview of Enrollment and Proficiency Testing Requirements section in the appropriate
Part 2 Medi-Cal manual.
[[page 3]]
ben clinic
3
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: April 2023
Family Planning-Related Services
The Family PACT Program covers the diagnosis and treatment of specified sexually
transmitted infections (STIs). In addition, the program covers urinary tract infections (UTIs)
and screening for cervical cancer and treatment of pre-invasive cervical lesions for women
when the care is provided coincident to a visit for the management of a family planning
method.
‹‹Family planning-related services for male and female clients are listed in the Benefits:
Family Planning-Related Services section in this manual, including associated restrictions.››
ICD-10-CM Codes for Family Planning-Related Services
An ICD-10-CM code for the family planning-related condition being treated is required on the
claim form. Services for the diagnosis and treatment of specified STIs, management of UTIs
and pre-invasive cervical lesions must be billed with the diagnosis code for these conditions,
together with the diagnosis code that identifies the contraceptive method for which the client
is being seen.
For more information, refer to the Benefits: Family Planning-Related Services and Drugs:
Onsite Dispensing Billing Instructions sections in this manual.
Laboratory Tests, Procedures and Drugs
‹‹Family planning-related services include tests for UTIs in women and specified STI
diagnostic laboratory tests. Office and outpatient procedures to treat specific STIs and
cervical abnormalities are also covered. Prescription drugs are reimbursed when they are an
appropriate treatment regimen and are listed in the Family PACT Pharmacy Formulary on
the Medi-Cal Rx website (https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov) and the Clinic Formulary section in
this manual. For a listing of covered services, refer to the Benefits: Family Planning-Related
Services and Drugs: Onsite Dispensing Billing Instructions sections in this manual.››
[[page 4]]
ben clinic
4
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: April 2023
Complications
Complications may arise as a result of the use of a contraceptive method as well as from the
treatment of a family planning-related condition. Management of complications requires a
Treatment Authorization Request (TAR).
Complication Restrictions for Family Planning Services
Services are available for management of complications that arise from the use of a
particular contraceptive method. Only those complications that can be reasonably managed
on an outpatient basis are reimbursable.
ICD-10-CM Codes for Complications of Family Planning Services
When a procedure, laboratory test or drug is for the management of a complication resulting
from the use of a particular contraceptive method, an ICD-10-CM code for the complication
is required on the claim. This code must be billed with the diagnosis code that identifies the
contraceptive method for which the client is being seen. For more information, see the
Benefits: Family Planning section in this manual.
Complications for Family Planning-Related Services
Complications that may arise from the treatment of an STI or UTI include severe skin
ulcerations/infections and allergic reactions to drugs or topical applications prescribed.
Complications from procedures to treat cervical abnormalities and pre-invasive lesions
include hemorrhage and pelvic infection secondary to surgical intervention.
Complication Restrictions for Family Planning-Related Services
‹‹Services for management of complications from the treatment of family planning-related
services are identified in this manual. Only those complications that can be reasonably
managed on an outpatient basis are reimbursable. Services are limited to the appropriate
gender.››
[[page 5]]
ben clinic
5
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: November 2025
ICD-10-CM Codes for Complications of Family Planning Related Services
When a procedure, lab test or prescription drug is for the management of a complication
from the treatment of a family planning-related service, an ICD-10-CM diagnosis code is
required on the claim form. This code must be billed with the diagnosis code that identifies
the contraceptive method for which the client is being seen. For additional information, see
the Benefits: Family Planning-Related Services and Drugs: Onsite Dispensing Billing
Instructions sections in this manual.
Treatment Authorization Request (TAR)
A TAR is required for complication services for both enrolled Family PACT providers and
Medi-Cal providers who deliver services upon referral from an enrolled Family PACT
provider. TAR requirements apply to medical, anesthesia, laboratory, pharmacy, radiology
and hospital providers. Authorization requirements for pharmacy providers submitting
pharmacy claims are found in the Family PACT Formulary on the Medi-Cal Rx website
(https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov). Authorization requirements for services billed on non-
pharmacy claims are in the Treatment Authorization Request (TAR) section in this manual.
For information about completing a TAR, refer to the TAR Completion section in the Part 2
Medi-Cal manual.
Comparable Services for Males and Females
Family PACT clinical services are comparable for both male and female clients, except for
appropriate gender differences, which are noted. Services shall be provided to eligible
clients in accordance with the Program Standards section in this manual.
‹‹Gender Affirming Care Services››
In all sections of this manual, regardless of the gender stated, the benefit or policy applies to
individuals of all gender identities as long as the procedure/benefit is medically necessary
and meets all other requirements.
Gender Override
‹‹For instructions on overriding gender differences for procedures, refer to the Gender
Affirming Care Services section in the appropriate Part 2 Medi-Cal manual.››
[[page 6]]
ben clinic
6
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: May 2024
Medical Justification
Medical record documentation must reflect the clinical rationale for providing, ordering or
deferring services rendered to clients according to the Program Standards section, including,
but not limited to, client assessment, diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Medical record
documentation must include justification to support claims for reimbursement. For more
information, refer to the Program Standards section in this manual.
Excluded Services
Procedures, lab tests, drugs and/or contraceptive supplies used for purposes other than
family planning or family planning-related services, as defined by the Family PACT Program,
are not reimbursable by the program. Family PACT has a limited scope of benefits and is not
a primary care program.
Drugs and/or supplies ordered by a provider who is not enrolled in the Family PACT
Program, without a referral by an enrolled Family PACT provider, are not reimbursable. For
more information, refer to “Family PACT Referrals” in the Provider Enrollment and
Responsibilities section in this manual.
If a non-covered service is recommended for a Family PACT client, the client must be
informed of the medical necessity of the service and that it is not reimbursed by the program.
The provider should inform the client that services can be rendered, but it may be an
out-of-pocket expense.
[[page 7]]
ben clinic
7
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: May 2024
Telehealth
Family PACT providers must ensure that the covered Family PACT service or benefit being
delivered via telehealth meets the procedural definition and components of the CPT or
HCPCS code(s) associated with the Family PACT covered service or benefit, as well as any
other requirements described in this manual. In addition, Family PACT services rendered by
the use of a telehealth modality must follow ICD-10-CM diagnosis code billing policy as
noted in this manual.
All healthcare practitioners rendering Family PACT covered benefits or services under this
policy must comply with all applicable state and federal laws.
Telehealth Definitions
For purposes of the telehealth policy outlined in this manual, the following definitions shall
apply:
Telehealth
“Telehealth” means the mode of delivering health care services and public health via
information and communication technologies to facilitate the diagnosis, consultation,
treatment, education, care management and self-management of a patient’s health care.
Telehealth facilitates patient self-management and caregiver support for patients and
includes synchronous interactions and asynchronous store and forward transfers.
Asynchronous Store and Forward
“Asynchronous store and forward” means the transmission of a patient’s medical information
from an originating site to the health care provider at a distant site. Consultations via
asynchronous electronic transmission initiated directly by patients, including through mobile
phone applications, are not covered under this policy.
E-Consults
“E-consults” fall under the auspice of store and forward. E-consults are asynchronous health
record consultation services that provide an assessment and management service in which
the patient’s treating health care practitioner (attending or primary) requests the opinion
and/or treatment advice of another health care practitioner (consultant) with specific
specialty expertise to assist in the diagnosis and/or management of the patient’s health care
needs without patient face-to-face contact with the consultant. E-consults between health
care providers are designed to offer coordinated multidisciplinary case reviews, advisory
opinions and recommendations of care. E-consults are permissible only between health care
providers.
[[page 8]]
ben clinic
8
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: May 2024
E-Visits
“E-visits” are communications between a patient and their provider through an online patient
portal.
Synchronous Interaction
“Synchronous interaction” means a real-time interaction between a patient and a health care
provider located at a distant site.
Distant Site
“Distant site” means a site where a health care provider who provides health care services is
located while providing these services via a telecommunications system. The distant site can
be different from the enrolled Family PACT service site for telehealth purposes only.
Originating Site
“Originating site” means a site where a patient is located at the time health care services are
provided via a telecommunications system or where the asynchronous store and forward
service originates. For purposes of reimbursement for Family PACT covered services
provided through telehealth, the type of setting where services are provided for the client or
by the health care provider is not limited. The type of setting may include, but is not limited
to, an enrolled Family PACT site such as a FQHC, medical office, community clinic, or the
client’s home.
Establishing New Patients via Telehealth
Family PACT providers may establish a relationship with new patients via synchronous
video telehealth visits.
Family PACT providers may also establish a relationship with new patients via audio-only
synchronous interaction only if one or more of the following applies:
• The visit is related to the provision of family planning services in accordance with
California Family Code Section 6925, subd. (a), Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I
Code), Section 24003, subd. (b), or medical care related to the diagnosis, treatment
and/or prevention of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) according to California
Family Code Section 6926, et seq. obtained by a patient at or above the minimum age
specified for consenting to these services.
• The patient requests an audio-only modality.
• The patient attests they do not have access to video.
[[page 9]]
ben clinic
9
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: May 2024
Consent for Services Provided via Telehealth
Family PACT providers must inform the client prior to the initial delivery of telehealth
services about the use of telehealth and obtain verbal or written consent from the client for
the use of telehealth as an acceptable mode of delivering health care services.
If a provider, whether at the originating site or distant site, maintains a general consent
agreement that specifically mentions use of telehealth as an acceptable modality for delivery
of services and includes the required information, as explained below, then this is sufficient
for documentation of client consent, and should be kept in the client’s medical record.
Providers must also document when a client consents to receive services via audio-only
prior to initial delivery of services. The consent shall be documented in the client’s medical
record and be available to DHCS upon request.
Providers are required to share additional information with clients regarding:
• Right to in-person services
• Voluntary nature of consent
• Limitations/risks of receiving services via telehealth, if applicable
• Availability of translation services
Consent requirements may be found in Business and Professions Code, Section 2290.5 [b].
Model patient consent language may be found on the DHCS website.
Family PACT providers who bill using the CMS-1500 Health Insurance Claim Form are
required to report the most applicable Place of Service (POS) code on the claim.
[[page 10]]
ben clinic
10
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: May 2024
‹‹Patient Choice of Telehealth Modality
Family PACT providers can offer a variety of telehealth modalities for covered services to
the extent that the service can be appropriately rendered via the allowable telehealth
modalities. For providers who do offer telehealth modalities, they are required to offer clients
the ability to choose whether they want to receive covered Family PACT services via:
• Synchronous, interactive audio/visual telecommunication systems (for example, video)
or
• Synchronous, telephone or other interactive audio-only telecommunications systems.
While Family PACT providers are required to offer both video and telephone telehealth
modalities, clients may freely choose, and change at any time, their desired telehealth
modalities, which includes the ability to decline video modalities and select audio-only
(telephone) modalities if preferred and/or necessary given the client’s needs.
For example, if the visit is related to sensitive services as defined in subsection (s) of
Section 56.05 of the Civil Code, then the client may prefer to utilize an audio-only
(telephone) modality.
Family PACT clients shall be given the choice of how they receive their covered Family
PACT services.
Right to In-Person Services
Family PACT providers furnishing services to clients through telehealth modalities must also
either offer services in-person or have a documented process in place to link Family PACT
clients to in-person care within a reasonable time if in-person services are unavailable from
the provider.
If the provider chooses to link the client to in-person care to satisfy this requirement, then
they must provide a referral to and facilitation of in-person care that does not require a client
to independently contact a different Family PACT provider to arrange for such care. The
Family PACT provider may initiate a process by which a different Family PACT provider in
their office or an affiliated in-person care site contacts the client directly to schedule an
in-person visit.
The referring Family PACT provider or a member of their staff must confirm the referred
Family PACT provider has at least attempted to contact the client to schedule an in-person
appointment. However, the Family PACT referring provider is not required to schedule an
appointment with a different provider on behalf of the Family PACT client. The Family PACT
provider must offer referral and facilitation support that is minimally burdensome to the
Family PACT client.
Family PACT providers must maintain documentation of their process to link Family PACT
clients to in-person care, which should be made available to DHCS upon request.››
[[page 11]]
ben clinic
11
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: November 2025
Reimbursable Telehealth Services
Family PACT covered benefits or services, identified by CPT or HCPCS codes and subject
to all existing Family PACT coverage and reimbursement policies, including any Treatment
Authorization Request (TAR) requirements, may be provided via a telehealth modality, as
outlined in this section, only if all of the following are satisfied:
• The provider at the distant site believes that the benefits or services being provided are
clinically appropriate based upon evidence-based medicine and/or best practices to be
delivered via telehealth.
• ‹‹The benefits or services delivered via telehealth meet the procedural definition and
components of the CPT or HCPCS code(s), as defined by the American Medical
Association (AMA), associated with the Family PACT covered service or benefit, as
well as any extended guidelines as described in this section and the Telehealth
Modalities section in the appropriate Part 2 Medi-Cal manual.››
• The benefits or services provided via telehealth meet all laws regarding confidentiality
of health care information and a client’s right to his or her medical information.
Payment Parity
The amount paid by DHCS and Medi-Cal managed care plans for a service rendered via
telehealth is the same as the amount paid for the applicable service when rendered
in-person.
Examples of Services Not Appropriate for Telehealth
Family PACT covered benefits or services that would not be expected to be appropriately
delivered via telehealth include, but are not limited to, benefits or services that are performed
in an operating room or while the patient is under anesthesia, require direct visualization or
instrumentation of bodily structures, involve sampling of tissue or insertion/removal of
medical devices, and/or otherwise require the in-person presence of the client for any
reason.
Billing Requirements
‹‹Refer to the Telehealth Modalities section, Billing Requirements subsection, in the
appropriate Part 2 Medi-Cal manual for billing requirements for specific telehealth services,
including the use of modifiers.››
[[page 12]]
ben clinic
12
Family PACT – Benefits: Clinical Services Overview
Page updated: May 2024
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.