[[page 1]]
prov enroll res
1
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: August 2022
This section outlines the requirements of enrollment and responsibilities as a Family
Planning, Access, Care and Treatment (Family PACT) Program provider, including, but not
limited to, administrative responsibilities, referring clients to Medi-Cal providers and other
programs, compliance reviews, and record keeping. The statutes and regulations noted in
this section are binding for all Family PACT providers, their designated agents, all public and
private agencies and/or individuals that are engaged in providing or securing Family PACT
services for, or on behalf of, eligible Family PACT clients. Providers should carefully review
the full text of California's Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I Code), Section 24005.
Eligible Providers
Per W&I Code, Section 24005(b) and (c), only licensed medical personnel with family
planning skills, competency and knowledge, may provide the full range of services covered
by the program. Medi-Cal enrolled providers, as determined by the Department of Health
Care Services (DHCS) shall be eligible to provide family planning services under the
program when the services are within their scope of practice and licensure. Eligible
providers shall provide the full scope of family planning, education, counseling and medical
services specified by Family PACT, either directly or by referral, consistent with the
standards of care issued by the Department per W&I Code, Section 24005(c). For more
information about the Family PACT Program Standards, refer to the Program Standards
section in this manual. Family PACT providers are required to offer and provide Long Acting
Reversible Contraception onsite. See Long Acting Reversible Contraception (LARC) in this
section for additional information.
Clinical providers electing to participate in the Family PACT Program must be enrolled
Medi-Cal providers in good standing prior to submitting a Family PACT application. A Family
PACT application submitted by a provider in which the service location and/or the
participating providers identified on the application for enrollment are not enrolled in Medi-Cal
or not in good standing with Medi-Cal shall be denied.
[[page 2]]
prov enroll res
2
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: August 2023
Eligible Provider Types
Solo providers, group providers, Primary Care Clinics (PCCs), Affiliate Primary Care Clinics
(APCCs), Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), Tribal FQHCs, community clinics,
intermittent clinics, mobile clinics, Rural Health Centers (RHCs), Indian Health Services
Memorandum of Agreement (IHS-MOA) 638 clinics, certain specialty clinics, and outpatient
hospitals are eligible to apply for enrollment in the Family PACT Program if they currently
have a National Provider Identifier (NPI) and are enrolled in Medi-Cal in good standing. See
Primary Care and Affiliate Primary Care Clinics in this section for additional information.
Intermittent clinics, as defined by Health and Safety (H&S) Code, Section 1206(h) and
mobile clinics, as defined by H&S Code, Sections 1765.120, 1765.150 and 1765.155, must
apply for enrollment in the Family PACT Program. Intermittent clinics and mobile clinics may
apply using their own NPI or their organizational NPI and must be enrolled in Medi-Cal in
good standing.
Ineligible Providers
Per W&I Code, Section 24005(g), providers and participating practitioners who, in the last
10 years, have been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor that involves fraud or abuse in
any government program, or have been found liable for fraud or abuse in any civil
proceeding, or entered into a settlement in lieu of conviction for fraud or abuse in any
government program will not be eligible to enroll in the Family PACT program.
Per W&I Code, Section 24005(h), providers and participating practitioners will not be eligible
to enroll in the Family PACT Program if they are under investigation by the department or
any local, state, or federal government law enforcement agency for fraud, abuse or has an
open department audit.
Enrollment
A provider’s enrollment is location specific. A (physical) service location is certified for
enrollment in the Family PACT Program when all the Family PACT provider enrollment
requirements set forth in this section have been met. A Family PACT site may only be
enrolled under one provider’s NPI, and no other organizational NPI may enroll at the same
service location. All Family PACT services shall be rendered by, or at, an enrolled service
location(s) only. ‹‹A telehealth only facility is not eligible to enroll in the Family PACT
Program.››
[[page 3]]
prov enroll res
3
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: August 2022
Provider Groups
The California Code of Regulation (CCR), Title 22, Chapter 3, Article 1, Section 51000.16,
defines a “Provider Group” as two or more rendering providers. When enrolling as a group
provider, failure to properly report at least two (2) rendering providers at the time of
application may result in the denial of the application. Rendering providers are individual
providers who render healthcare services, or provide goods, supplies, or merchandise, as a
member of a provider group and use the group provider number to bill the Family PACT
Program.
Primary Care and Affiliate Primary Care Clinics
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code (H&S Code) 1222, an applicant for licensure as a
Primary Care Clinic (PCC), as defined in subdivision (a) of H&S Code, Section 1204 may
submit an application for review of the clinic’s qualifications for participation in the Family
PACT Program simultaneously with the clinic’s application for enrollment and certification as
a provider in the Medi-Cal Program.
An Affiliate Primary Care Clinic (APCC) enrollment in the Family PACT Program is dictated by
W&I Code, Section 24005(t) (1) and (2).
Within 30 calendar days of receiving a complete application for enrollment into the Family
PACT Program from an APCC licensed under H&S Code, Section 1218.1, the department
will do one of the following:
• Approve the APCC’s Family PACT application, provided the applicant meets the Family
PACT provider enrollment requirements set forth in this section; or
• If the APCC is enrolled in Medi-Cal in good standing, notify the applicant in writing of
any discrepancies identified in the Family PACT enrollment application. The applicant
shall then have 30 calendar days from the date of the written notice to correct any
identified discrepancies. Upon receipt of all requested corrections, the department shall
approve the application within 30 calendar days. The APCC’s Family PACT enrollment
effective date will then be made retroactive to the date the department received the
Family PACT enrollment application; or
• If the APCC is not enrolled in Medi-Cal at the time the provider’s Family PACT
enrollment application is submitted, DHCS shall not proceed with the actions until it
receives confirmation that the APCC is enrolled in Medi-Cal. After DHCS receives
confirmation of Medi-Cal enrollment, and the APCC’s
• Family PACT application is approved, the APCC’s Family PACT enrollment date will be
made retroactive to the date the APCC was enrolled in Medi-Cal
All APCCs are subject to the provider orientation requirements set forth in this section.
[[page 4]]
prov enroll res
4
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2026
Non-Physician Medical Practitioners
Non-Physician Medical Practitioners (NMPs) employed by a Medi-Cal provider who will be
delivering Family PACT services must be identified on the Family PACT Supplemental
Application in the Provider Application and Validations for Enrollment (PAVE) Provider Portal
and complete a Family PACT Program Practitioner Participation Agreement (DHCS 4470).
NMPs eligible to participate in the Family PACT Program include Certified Nurse
Practitioners (CNPs), Physician Assistants (PAs) and Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs).
Definitions for NMPs are located in the Non-Physician Medical Practitioners (NMP) section
in the appropriate Part 2 Medi-Cal provider manual. Unless otherwise stated, the Family
PACT Program defers to Medi-Cal policies, billing instructions and reimbursement for NMPs
who deliver Family PACT services.
NMPs are authorized to deliver the full scope of Family PACT family planning and family
planning-related services within their scope of practice and to the extent permitted by
applicable professional licensing statutes and regulations as set forth in the
physician/practitioner interface document.
Providers Not Required to Enroll
Anesthesiologists, laboratories, pharmacies and radiologists are not required to enroll in the
Family PACT Program, but must be enrolled in Medi-Cal. Anesthesiologists, laboratories,
pharmacies and radiologists cannot enroll or recertify clients in the Family PACT Program.
Ordering, Referring, or Prescribing (ORP) Providers
W&I Code, Section 14043.1(b) and (o) require the enrollment of ORP providers as
participating providers in the Medi-Cal program. W&I Code, Section 14043.15(b)(3) provides
that the NPI of the ORP provider must be listed on all claims for reimbursement.
There are three basic requirements for ORP providers:
• The ORP provider must be enrolled in Medi-Cal as a billing provider, rendering provider
or as an ORP only (non-billing) provider.
• The ORP provider’s enrolled NPI (Type 1) must be for an individual, not an
organizational NPI.
• The ORP provider must be eligible to order, refer and/or prescribe in accordance with
law and the health care practitioner’s practice act.
[[page 5]]
prov enroll res
5
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2026
If an ORP provider identified on a Family PACT claim is not enrolled in Medi-Cal, the claim
for reimbursement of the goods or services they provided in filling a client’s order, referral or
prescription will be denied.
Additional information on ORP providers is available on the DHCS website.
Long-Acting Reversible Contraception (LARC)
‹‹Family PACT providers are required to offer long-acting reversible contraceptive (LARC)
services onsite at the service location. LARCs include intrauterine devices (IUDs) and the
contraceptive implant. Family PACT providers are required to offer, at minimum, the
contraceptive implant and at least one type of hormonal IUD and non-hormonal IUD onsite.
LARC services include both insertion and removal of the devices.
Each service location enrolling into the Family PACT Program must identify, at a minimum,
one clinician trained to provide LARC services onsite. Per W&I Code 24005(k), providers
who offer LARC services shall have received prior clinical training specific to these
procedures. The trained clinician(s) must be indicated on the application for enrollment. ››
All providers performing Nexplanon insertions or removals must complete the FDA-required
Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) certification. For more information, visit the
Nexplanon REMS website. Potential insertion- and removal-related events must be reported
immediately to the Nexplanon REMS using the Insertion and Removal-Related Events
Documentation Form, which is available on the Nexplanon REMS website, or by calling
1-833-697-7367.
Applying for Enrollment
Per W&I Code, Section 24005(e), DHCS may screen applicants at the initial application and
at any reapplication pursuant to the requirements developed by DHCS to determine provider
suitability for the program.
Provider applicants interested in applying for enrollment into the Family PACT Program shall
follow the application instructions listed on the Family PACT and DHCS websites. The
Family PACT Program Provider Agreement (DHCS 4469) and the Family PACT Program
Practitioner Participation Agreement (DHCS 4470) are located on the Family PACT website
and must be completed, signed and submitted to the program using the PAVE Provider
Portal.
Each practitioner, Medical Doctor (MD) and NMP serving Family PACT clients shall agree to
comply with Family PACT Program Standards by signing the DHCS 4470. The DHCS 4470
is not required to be completed by providers listed in Medi-Cal’s Provider Master File as an
APCC, nonprofit community clinic or PCC, or Indian Health Services, or Memorandum of
Agreement (IHS-MOA) 638 Clinics.
[[page 6]]
prov enroll res
6
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: January 2025
Enrollment Forms and Agreements
Enrollment forms and agreements shall be:
• Signed under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of California. Background
checks and data searches are performed to verify the information provided on the
enrollment forms.
• Completed by the provider applicant only.
• Submitted by the provider. Any enrollment forms received by a third party (for example:
consultants, attorneys, or enrollment brokers) will not be accepted. Additionally, third
parties (for example: consultants, attorneys, or enrollment brokers) must not be the
contact person listed on the application.
Providers must maintain legible copies of all initial and updated provider enrollment
applications, initial and updated provider and practitioner agreements, and all related
required training documents at the provider site. A site certifier’s orientation certificate of
attendance must be displayed at all times.
Additional Documentation
Copies of the following supporting documentation may be requested during the application
process:
• All clinic policies and procedures for Family PACT client eligibility and enrollment (for
example: policies and procedures and/or staff training plan for enrolling clients, record
retention of CEC forms and client appointment process, etc.).
• All clinic policies and procedures for referrals and follow-ups for all services provided at
the location (i.e., policies and procedures and/or staff training plan for referring clients
for services covered by Family PACT, but not offered by the provider, clinician
visit/back office documentation procedures, documentation procedures for the
education and counseling provided, and the patient outcome/treatment plan, etc.).
Additional information regarding referrals can be found in the Program Standards
section in this provider manual.
• Clinic organizational chart (for example: staff list and roles for each, etc.)
• Any additional documentation requested by DHCS.
[[page 7]]
prov enroll res
7
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2026
Application Deficiencies
Applicants are allowed 60 calendar days from the notification date to resubmit a corrected
application when the application is returned deficient.
If a Family PACT provider applicant and/or new provider location fails to resubmit the
corrected application with all deficiencies remediated to the DHCS’ Office of Family Planning
(OFP) within 60 calendar days, the application will be denied.
Applicants denied for failure to resubmit or remediate deficiencies in a timely manner may
reapply at any time.
Additional Provider Locations
To enroll additional provider locations under the organizational NPI, each additional provider
location must be enrolled in Medi-Cal in good standing. Provider applicants applying to enroll
additional locations shall follow the application instructions listed on the Family PACT and
DHCS websites.
Provider Orientation and Required Trainings
‹‹The Provider Orientation and required trainings provide an overview on comprehensive
family planning, program benefits and services, client eligibility, provider responsibilities and
program compliance.
All required trainings are posted on the Family PACT Online Training Center website.››
Site Certifier Training Requirements
‹‹Medi-Cal enrolled providers attempting to enroll into the Family PACT Program must
complete the legislatively mandated Provider Orientation per W&I Code, Section 24005(k).
The provider must designate a site certifier on the application for enrollment to complete the
Provider Orientation. The Provider Orientation must be completed prior to rendering Family
PACT services. Site Certifiers are required to complete the Provider Orientation every two
(2) years.
Prior to registering for the Provider Orientation, the site certifier must complete all required
online trainings, which must be completed every two (2) years.››
Family PACT enrolled providers attempting to recertify a service location must complete the
required online trainings prior to submitting an application for recertification and must
complete the Provider Orientation within 120 calendar days of receiving the recertification
notification letter unless the site certifier has attended a Provider Orientation within the last
two (2) years.
[[page 8]]
prov enroll res
8
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2026
All Other Clinic Staff Training Requirements
‹‹Clinicians and all other clinic staff administering the Family PACT Program must also
complete all required online trainings prior to submitting an enrollment application.
The trainings are based on the primary functional role of a provider’s staff and must be
completed every five (5) years, or as directed by DHCS. For more information and the
complete list of the required trainings visit the Family PACT Online Training Center.››
Site Certifier
Each provider applicant must designate an eligible representative who works at the service
location to be the location’s site certifier. A Medical Director, MD, CNP, PA or CNM who is
enrolled in Medi-Cal is eligible to certify the service location. The designated site certifier
must be identified on the application for enrollment.
The site certifier may only be designated as the site certifier at one service location, with the
exception of certain clinic types. The following clinic types may enroll multiple, but no more
than 10, service location addresses under one site certifier:
• A PCC that serves as a parent clinic as described in H&S Code, Section 1218.1, and
one or more of its affiliate primary care clinics, or
• Community clinics licensed under H&S Code, Section 1204(a), and rural health clinics
as defined in Title 42 of the United States Code, Section 1396d(l)(1), that operate
multiple service locations, such as intermittent clinics exempt from licensure under
H&S Code, Section 1206(h).
The designated site certifier is responsible for overseeing the family planning services
rendered at the identified service location and will have the following responsibilities:
• Ensure the service location is adhering to all current Family PACT program standards,
policies and administrative practices through regular provider staff trainings and
communications, updating clinical policies and procedures as applicable, regular
self-audits and chart reviews.
• ‹‹Ensure that all clinicians and other clinic staff providing services on behalf of the
Family PACT Program (e.g., clinical services, client certification and enrollment, billing,
etc.) complete and track all required trainings every five (5) years.››
• Use the results of the Department or other local, state or federal agency’s compliance
review(s) or audits to identify areas that shall be the subject of ongoing monitoring and
self-audits.
‹‹The site certifier may delegate responsibilities, as appropriate, and according to the scope
of the clinic staff’s certification, licensure and/or job duties.›› Responsibilities pertaining to
clinical standards and practices must be delegated to a Medical Director, MD, CNP, PA or
CNM.
[[page 9]]
prov enroll res
9
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: October 2025
Enrolled service locations electing a new site certifier are required to have the site certifier:
• Submit a DHCS 4470 to DHCS (APCCs, nonprofit community clinics or PCCs, and
IHS-MOA 638 clinics are exempt from the DHCS 4470 requirement);
• Complete all required online trainings;
• Attend a Provider Orientation within 120 calendar days of site certifier designation,
unless the site certifier has attended a Provider Orientation within the last two (2)
years; and
• Provide any additional documentation as requested by DHCS.
Site certifier guidelines for entities with multiple service locations enrolling under a single site
certifier require the providers to:
• Agree to and sign, and ensure the site certifier agrees to and signs, the section of the
Family PACT Program Provider Agreement (DHCS 4469) pertaining to a single site
certifier overseeing multiple locations. This ensures all responsibilities related to
overseeing family planning services and maintaining program compliance will be met.
• Complete Site Certifier for Multiple Service Locations Declaration (DHCS 4475). All
required documents identified on the form will be subject to review by DHCS, and the
provider will be notified upon approval.
A Medical Director, MD, CNP, PA or CNM will not be eligible to serve as a site certifier if
they are under investigation by any local, state or federal government agency, including
DHCS, for fraud or abuse; have an open department audit; or have previous sanctions. This
includes any previous disciplinary action, probation, and/or limits on practice by the Medical
Board of California. PAs are approved by the Physician Assistants Board of California to
perform direct patient care services under the supervision of a licensed physician.
Enrollment Confirmation
Once all provider enrollment requirements set forth in this section have been met and the
Family PACT application is approved, the Family PACT enrollment effective date will be
retroactive to the date DHCS’ OFP received the Family PACT application.
Providers will receive written confirmation of enrollment, including the Family PACT
enrollment effective date.
[[page 10]]
prov enroll res
10
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2026
Recertification for Continued Participation
Family PACT providers must recertify their enrollment as a Family PACT provider every five
(5) years or as directed by DHCS.
The recertification process includes reapplication for enrollment in the Family PACT
Program, which requires that:
• ‹‹A complete application, with uploaded required documents, be submitted to DHCS
OFP using the PAVE Provider Portal within 60 calendar days of the notification by
DHCS OFP.›› Refer to Applying for Enrollment outlined in this section for a description
of the required documents. If corrections are needed, 60 calendar days are allowed
from the notification date to resubmit a corrected application.
• The information on the application and agreement(s) must match the information on file
with DHCS PED.
• ‹‹The site certifier complete all required online trainings within 60 calendar days of the
notification of recertification by DHCS.›› The site certifier will have 120 calendar days
from the date of notification to complete the Provider Orientation unless the site
certifier has attended a Provider Orientation within the last two (2) years.
• ‹‹All clinicians listed on the application complete all required online trainings prior to
submitting an application.››
The provider will be disenrolled from the Family PACT program if they fail to do any of the
following:
• Submit a complete application within 60 calendar days of receiving written notification
by DHCS OFP, or, if applicable:
• Remediate a deficient application within 60 calendar days, or
• Complete the Provider Orientation within 120 calendar days.
Reporting a Change of Information
Providers shall report to both DHCS’ PED and DHCS’ OFP within 35 calendar days of any
addition or change in information previously submitted in the application package. Failure to
notify DHCS’ PED and DHCS’ OFP of any changes to previously submitted information may
result in disenrollment from the Family PACT Program.
[[page 11]]
prov enroll res
11
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: October 2025
A provider must submit a new application to DHCS’ OFP within 35 calendar days when
reporting the following changes to a Medi-Cal record and the new information in the
application must already be on file on file with DHCS’ PED:
• Service, mailing and/or pay-to addresses.
• National Provider Identifier (NPI).
• Taxpay Identification Number (TIN).
• Legal name or business name.
These changes do not require a provider to attend a Provider Orientation to certify the
service location unless the service location is designating a new site certifier. For more
information related to site certifier requirements, refer to site certifier in this section.
If the changes are to provider type or ownership, a provider must reapply for enrollment in
the Family PACT Program within 35 days of the action taken, e.g., an individual provider
changes their provider type from a solo provider to a group provider. The new information in
the application must already be on file with DHCS’ PED. The site certifier must complete all
required trainings to certify the service location including attending Provider Orientation,
unless the site certifier has attended a Provider Orientation within the last two (2) years.
Program Integrity and Compliance
The Family PACT Standards define the scope, type, and quality of care required under the
Family PACT Program, and the terms and conditions under which the providers will be
reimbursed.
Family PACT providers shall establish policies and procedures to comply with the Family
PACT Standards and administrative policies contained in this manual, including applicable
regulations and laws and program policies and administrative practices. The Department
may conduct or arrange for compliance reviews and/or audits to be conducted to ensure
compliance with Family PACT Standards, regulations and laws and program policies and
administrative practices. In addition, desk reviews or provider self-audits may be performed
and/or requested by DHCS. Follow-up compliance reviews, audits or site reviews may occur
as deemed necessary. Failure to comply with Family PACT Standards, regulations and laws
and program policies and administrative practices will result in suspension and/or
disenrollment from the Family PACT Program.
[[page 12]]
prov enroll res
12
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: October 2025
Compliance reviews shall cover a period of time as determined by DHCS, and include but
are not limited to, a review of medical records, staff employment files, detailed job
descriptions, appropriate licensing and certification for all personnel, business related
contracts and documents outlining budgets and fiscal integrity. If a compliance review results
in a corrective action plan (CAP) or temporary suspension, the provider must agree to
comply with all aspects of the program’s directed CAP or suspension before the provider is
reinstated. The site certifier shall use the results of the compliance review to identify the
areas that shall be the subject of ongoing monitoring and periodic self-audits.
Self-monitoring is required and shall include documentation of completed trainings signed by
staff; ensuring client files are reviewed and re-certified annually, ensuring all Family PACT
forms are accurately completed and medical record documentation meets the Family PACT
Program Standards.
Additional Screening Requirements for Enrolling and
Maintaining Enrollment
DHCS reserves the right to limit the enrollment of new providers in designated service areas,
if DHCS, at its sole discretion, determines that the service area is adequately covered.
Provider enrollment screening to determine provider suitability into the program is necessary
to safeguard the fiscal and programmatic integrity of the Family PACT Program.
Per W&I Code, Section 24005(f), DHCS may conduct a background check for the purpose of
verifying the accuracy of the information provided on the application package. The
background check may include, but is not limited to, the following: one (1) on-site inspection
before, during, or after enrollment, for the purpose of determining whether enrollment or
continued enrollment is warranted; two (2) review of business records and
three (3) data searches.
DHCS may prohibit a provider from enrolling in the Family PACT Program for up to three (3)
years if its enrollment application is denied as the result of a provider submitting false or
misleading information (or omitted information from) on or with its application in order to gain
enrollment in the Family PACT Program.
[[page 13]]
prov enroll res
13
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: October 2025
Provider Disenrollment
Providers, including all of the provider’s site locations, are subject to disenrollment for failure
to adhere to program standards, policies and administrative practices. DHCS shall
immediately disenroll the provider from the Family PACT Program when:
• Documents mailed to a provider’s mailing address, pay-to address or business
address, are returned by the United States Postal Service as not deliverable.
• A provider has not submitted a claim for reimbursement to the Family PACT Program,
for a period of one (1) year.
• The provider, any individual who, or any entity that has a license, certificate or other
approval to provide healthcare, which is revoked or suspended by a federal, California
or another state’s licensing, certification or other approval authority, has otherwise lost
that license, certificate or approval while a disciplinary hearing on that license,
certificate or approval or has surrendered that license, certificate, or approval while a
disciplinary hearing on the license, certificate, or approval was pending.
• The provider’s license is currently revoked under a different name, NPI, or business
identity, and the applicable reenrollment bar period has not expired.
• The provider submits claims for services performed at, or items furnished from, a
location that it knew or should reasonably have known did not comply with Family
PACT enrollment requirements.
• A provider receives recertification for continued participation notification and fails to
respond to the Department within the designated timeframes.
• Pursuant to W&I Code, Section 24005(h), if it is discovered that a provider is under
investigation by the department or any local, state, or federal government law
enforcement agency for fraud or abuse or has an open department audit.
Disenrollment from the Family PACT Program by DHCS is not subject to an administrative
appeal. Disenrolled providers may reapply to become a Family PACT provider. Approval will
be considered on a case-by-case basis. Disenrollment from the Family PACT Program may
affect eligibility to participate in other programs and/or result in additional sanctions or
penalties.
DHCS’ OFP shall make referrals to the Medi-Cal Program for those providers who are
suspected of fraud, waste, and abuse. If a provider is suspended from the Medi-Cal
Program, enrollment in the Family PACT Program is terminated effective the date of the
Medi-Cal suspension and Family PACT services are no longer reimbursable. Providers and
provider staff who are disenrolled from the Family PACT Program for fraud, waste, and
abuse may not reapply for a minimum period of three (3) years from the date of
disenrollment.
[[page 14]]
prov enroll res
14
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: October 2025
Provider Suspension
DHCS has the discretion to suspend and/or take corrective action against a provider in lieu of
disenrollment. DHCS may terminate or constitute grounds for issuing a reprimand; place the
provider on probationary status; or suspend the provider from participation in the Family
PACT Program, in accordance with the regulations contained in W&I Code Section 14123
and CCR, Title 22, Chapter 3, Article 6, Section 51452(a).
Voluntary Disenrollment
Providers may terminate their participation in the Family PACT Program at any time by
following the instructions listed on the Family PACT website.
Reinstatement
If a provider was determined ineligible to participate in the Medi-Cal program, and is
reinstated, the provider’s Family PACT status is not automatically reinstated. The provider
must reapply to become a Family PACT provider. Approval as an enrolled Family PACT
provider will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Provider Responsibilities
Nondiscrimination and Language Assistance
Medi-Cal providers may not discriminate against beneficiaries and must provide language
assistance services, as described below.
Nondiscrimination
Medi-Cal providers must allow full and equal access to the benefits of the Medi-Cal program
and may not discriminate on the basis of:
• Race*
• Color*
• Sex*
• Age*
• National origin*
• Ancestry
• Ethnic group identification
• Religion
• Disability*
• Mental disability
• Physical disability
• Medical condition
• Genetic information
• Marital status
• Gender
• Gender identity
• Sexual orientation
[[page 15]]
prov enroll res
15
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2024
Language Assistance Under Federal Law
Under the regulations implementing Section 1557, of the Patient Protection and Affordable
Care Act (ACA), Medi-Cal providers must take reasonable steps to ensure limited English
proficient (LEP) individuals have meaningful access to the health program or activity they
provide. Language assistance services must be accurate, timely, provided free of charge
and protect the privacy and independence of the LEP individual. These language assistance
services may include interpretation (oral language assistance) and written translation of
content in paper or electronic form per the Code of Federal Regulations (45 CFR
Sec. 92.101).
Language Assistance Under State Law for Managed Care Plans
In addition to federal requirements, under W&I Code Section 14029.91, a managed care
plan contracted with DHCS to provide Medi-Cal services must provide language assistance
services to LEP beneficiaries who are mandatorily enrolled in managed care as follows:
• Oral interpretation services must be provided in any language on a 24-hour basis at
key points of contact.
• Translation services must be provided to the language groups identified by DHCS
(See DHCS All Plan Letter [APL 20-015, 17-011] and any subsequent APLs).
A managed care plan must notify beneficiaries of the availability of language assistance
services, including oral interpretation and translated written materials, free of charge and in a
timely manner, when those services are necessary to provide meaningful access to health
care programs or activities to LEP beneficiaries. (W&I Code Sections 14029.91, 14727).
Requirement Resources
For more information about the application and requirements of W&I Code 14029.91 and the
rule implementing Section 1557 of the ACA, providers should contact their representative
professional organizations. Visit the HHS Section 1557 web page for find more information
on Section 1557 of the ACA.
Contact Information for Claims of Discrimination
In the event that a Family PACT client makes a claim that a health care provider has failed to
provide covered Family PACT services or unlawfully discriminated in another way on the
basis of sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, ethnic group identification, age,
mental disability, physical disability, medical condition, genetic information, marital status,
gender, gender identity, or sexual orientation, the health care provider must refer the Family
PACT client to its representative designated to coordinate compliance with nondiscrimination
requirements, or to handle grievances generally, and to DHCS’ Office of Civil Rights (OCR)
by phone, in writing or electronically.
[[page 16]]
prov enroll res
16
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: October 2025
By phone: Call (916) 440-7370. If clients cannot speak or hear well, call 711
(Telecommunications Relay Service).
In writing: fill out a complaint form or send a letter to:
Department of Health Care Services
Office of Civil Rights, MS 0009
P.O. Box 997413, Sacramento, CA 95899- 7413
Email: CivilRights@dhcs.ca.gov
Complaint forms are available on the DHCS website (www.dhcs.ca.gov).
The health care provider must also refer the Family PACT client to the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, OCR by phone, in writing or electronical.
By phone: call (800) 368-1019. If clients cannot speak or hear well, call TTY/TDD at
(800) 537-7697.
In writing: fill out a complaint form or send a letter to:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
200 Independence Avenue, SW
Room 509F, HHH Building
Washington D.C., 20201-0004
Complaint forms are available on the HHS website.
Electronically: Visit the OCR Complaint Portal on the HHS website.
Access to Care
The Family PACT provider is responsible for client access to Family PACT Program services
in accordance with the requirements of the Family PACT Standards. Enrolled Family PACT
providers agree to make available to eligible clients the scope of comprehensive family
planning and family planning-related services, consistent with the Family PACT Standards,
either directly or by referral. ‹‹These services must be made available to clients on the same
day that their eligibility is determined. Providers must also inform enrolled clients that their
HAP Identification Numbers are valid at any Family PACT provider site. Clients must only be
referred to enrolled Family PACT providers or Medi-Cal enrolled providers.››
Collaboration Encouraged
Enrolled Family PACT providers have the responsibility to ensure client access to services
and are encouraged to collaborate with other providers, such as laboratory, pharmacy and
primary care providers. Ensuring that other providers participating in client care have
information about the Family PACT Program will facilitate clients’ access and care.
[[page 17]]
prov enroll res
17
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: January 2025
Family PACT Referrals
Medi-Cal providers who are not enrolled in the Family PACT Program may render Family
PACT services only when the client is referred by an enrolled Family PACT provider. Family
PACT providers may refer clients to Medi-Cal laboratory, pharmacy, radiology and
anesthesiology providers for covered services. Referrals may be made to a Medi-Cal or
other Family PACT provider when a covered procedure is outside the technical skill of the
Family PACT provider or when there is insufficient volume to ensure and maintain a high
skill level of the Family PACT provider.
Referring Providers
The referring Family PACT provider is responsible for informing all rendering providers
(including clinicians, laboratories, anesthesiologists, radiologists and facilities) of Family
PACT Program policies and scope of services, so that clients do not receive services that
are not program benefits and are not charged for services. A Medi-Cal provider who is not
enrolled in the Family PACT Program must know the following information to bill for services:
• Client name
• ‹‹HAP Identification Number››
• Family planning ICD-10-CM diagnosis code and any additional ICD-10-CM diagnosis
code(s) needed and reimbursed by Family PACT and
• Referring enrolled Family PACT provider’s name and NPI
Client Records Transfer
Family PACT clients must not be charged for exchange or transfer of medical record
information.
Primary Care and Local Resource Referral
Family PACT Standards include a provision that providers shall make referrals to
appropriate resources for needed medical, psychosocial and more intensive counseling
services that are not covered by this Program, including primary care not offered in enrolled
provider practices. Information about other sources of funding for these services and options
for a sliding-fee-scale is particularly helpful for clients who have no other health care or
mental health care coverage.
[[page 18]]
prov enroll res
18
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: November 2024
Other Programs by Referral
Family PACT providers may refer clients to other programs, such as Every Woman Counts
(EWC), Breast and Cervical Cancer Treatment Program (BCCTP) and Presumptive
Eligibility for Pregnant People (PE4PP).
Every Woman Counts
Clients who meet the EWC eligibility requirements, with a finding such as a positive
mammogram, breast nodule or bloody nipple discharge, and require diagnostic testing to
evaluate the possibility of breast cancer diagnosis may be referred to EWC at
1-800-511-2300. For eligibility requirements, refer to the Every Woman Counts section in
the appropriate Part 2 Medi-Cal manual. ‹‹After a cancer diagnosis is confirmed, either the
Family PACT provider or the EWC primary care provider may enroll the client into BCCTP
for treatment using the Breast and Cervical Cancer Treatment Program application in the
Medi-Cal Provider Portal.››
Breast and Cervical Cancer Treatment Program
Family PACT providers have the opportunity to enroll clients directly into BCCTP for services
beyond the scope of Family PACT. ‹‹The BCCTP provides Medi-Cal benefits for the
treatment of breast and cervical cancer. Family PACT providers may enroll clients with a
breast or cervical cancer diagnosis (including CIN 2 and CIN 3) into BCCTP using the Breast
and Cervical Cancer Treatment Program application in the Medi-Cal Provider Portal.››
Clients must meet the Family PACT income guidelines in order to be referred to, or enrolled
in, BCCTP. For more information about BCCTP, call 1 (800) 824-0088. To find out how to
participate as a referring provider, call the Telephone Service Center (TSC) at
1 (800) 541-5555.
[[page 19]]
prov enroll res
19
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: October 2025
Presumptive Eligibility for Pregnant People
PE4PP is a Medi-Cal program designed to provide immediate, temporary coverage for
prenatal care to low-income, pregnant recipients pending a formal Medi-Cal application. Any
individual who thinks they are pregnant and whose family income is below a determined
amount is eligible for PE. However, this care must be through a participating provider to
determine eligibility for this program. For more information, and to find out how to become a
PE4PP provider, refer to the Presumptive Eligibility for Pregnant People Provider Enrollment
Instructions section in the appropriate Part 2 Medi-Cal Provider Manual.
Recordkeeping
Medical Record Documentation
In accordance with W&I Code, Section 24005(p), each provider of health care services
rendered to any program beneficiary shall keep and maintain records of each service
rendered, the beneficiary to whom the service was rendered, the date and any additional
information that the department may by regulation require. The clinical rationale for
providing, ordering or deferring services for client assessment, diagnosis, treatment and
follow-up is required. Documentation must reflect the scope of education and counseling
services, including individual client assessment. All medical record entries must be legible
and the clinician must be clearly identifiable.
Documentation for benefits or services delivered via telehealth should be the same as for a
comparable in-person service. The distant site provider can bill for Family PACT covered
benefits or services delivered via telehealth using the appropriate CPT® or HCPCS codes
with the corresponding modifier and is responsible for maintaining appropriate supporting
documentation. This documentation must be maintained in the client’s medical record.
Recordkeeping
The Family PACT Program defers to Medi-Cal regulations for keeping and maintaining
medical records. For a summary of Medi-Cal regulations, refer to the Provider Regulations
section in the Part 1 Medi-Cal manual. The Family PACT Program has additional guidelines
for recordkeeping that include, but are not limited to:
• Client Eligibility Certification (CEC) form (DHCS 4461)
• Consent For Sterilization (DHCS 8649)
• Signature requirement for drugs and devices
• A log of devices and implants
[[page 20]]
prov enroll res
20
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2024
Client Eligibility Certification (CEC) Form
The provider must maintain the Client Eligibility Certification (CEC) form in the medical
record for each applicant/client, including those found ineligible, for at least three (3) years.
The CEC form may be maintained electronically, in compliance with all aspects of H&S
Code, Section 123149.
Signature for Drugs or Devices Billed to Family PACT
W&I Code, Section 14043.341 requires providers to obtain and keep a record of Family
PACT client signatures, acknowledging the dispensing of a drug, device or supplies, or when
obtaining a laboratory specimen. Providers who dispense a drug, device or supplies
requiring a written order or prescription to be covered under the program, and providers who
obtain a specimen for performance of a clinical laboratory test or examination, must maintain
the following items in their files to qualify for Family PACT reimbursement:
• Signature of the person receiving the drug or device, or from whom a specimen was
obtained.
• Client’s printed name.
• Date signed.
• Prescription number or item description for drugs or devices.
• Relationship of the client to the person receiving a prescription, if the client is not
picking up the medication.
As an alternative, a provider obtaining a specimen for a clinical laboratory test or
examination may satisfy this requirement by doing both of the following:
• Keep the requisition document provided to the clinical laboratory on file, and
• Obtain the signature and printed name of the client on the requisition document.
Several exceptions apply to the signature requirement. A provider does not need to obtain a
signature and related information when:
• A biological specimen is obtained for the purpose of anatomical pathology
examinations performed during inpatient or outpatient surgery, if a notation of the
performance of the anatomical pathology examination appears in the medical record.
• Dispensing a complimentary sample of a dangerous drug, provided no charge is made
to the patient and an appropriate record is entered in the client's chart.
[[page 21]]
prov enroll res
21
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2024
• Dispensing a drug or device occurs on a periodic basis within an established
provider/patient relationship. The signature shall only be required with the initial
dispensing or furnishing of the drug, so long as an appropriate record of each
dispensing or furnishing is entered in the patient’s chart.
• Obtaining a biological specimen is required in order that a test or examination occurs
on a periodic basis within an established provider/patient relationship. The signature
shall only be required upon obtaining the biological specimen necessary for the initial
test or examination, so long as an appropriate record of each test or examination is
entered in the patient’s chart.
• The provider is a licensed pharmacy or clinical laboratory, owned and operated by a
non-profit health care service plan with at least 3,500,000 enrollees, or is owned and
operated by a non-profit hospital corporation that has a mutually exclusive contract
with a non-profit health care service plan with at least 3,500,000 enrollees.
The provider is a licensed provider who practices within a physician organization that meets
either of the requirements set forth in paragraph two (2) of subdivision (g) of H&S Code,
Section 1375.4; that is, a risk-bearing organization such as a professional medical
corporation, medical partnership, medical foundation or other lawfully organized group of
physicians that deliver, furnish, arrange for or provide health care services.
Providers who bill Family PACT but do not comply with the requirements and do not qualify
for an exception, will be subject to civil money penalties.
Signature Requirement for Medication Delivery
In accordance with W&I Code, Section 14043.341, providers must obtain either a
handwritten or electronic signature for prescription medications sent to a client. Providers
may obtain the signature of a client or the recipient either before the medication is sent, or
upon receipt when delivered to the client.
Signature Prior to Delivery
Providers have two options to obtain a client’s signature when the client is not in person,
such as during a telehealth visit:
• Recorded oral signature: Providers must ensure that they are able to collect an audio
or video recording that can be stored in the provider’s case record and retrieved upon
request. Providers may use either of the following two options for audio or
video- recorded signatures.
[[page 22]]
prov enroll res
22
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: January 2025
– Recording only the signature portion of the telehealth visit. When recording only the
signature portion of the visit, providers must record the portion of the visit where the
client acknowledges and confirms the medications they will be receiving and
provides their understanding that the oral signature holds the same weight as a
written signature; or
– Recording the entire visit with the oral signature included
• Electronic signature: Providers may obtain an electronic signature. Consistent with the
Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, California Civil Code Section 1633.2, an
“electronic signature” is an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to or logically
associated with an electronic record and executed or adopted by a person with the
intent to sign the electronic record. An electronic signature includes a “digital signature”
defined in subdivision (d) of Section 16.5 of the Government Code to mean an
electronic identifier, created by a computer, intended by the party using it to have the
same force and effect as a manual signature. Regardless of the type of electronic
signature collected, providers must ensure that they are able to store and/or easily
access documentation of the electronic signature in the client’s medical record.
Signature upon Receipt of Delivery
Providers may obtain a client’s handwritten or electric signature upon receipt of delivery if the
delivery service offers physical or electronic return receipts, such as those offered through
the United States Postal Service. Providers must retain documentation of the signature in
the client’s medical record.
Log of Intrauterine Contraceptive Devices and Contraceptive Implants
For at least three (3) years from the date of insertion, providers should keep a written log or
electronic record of all intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUC) and contraceptive implants
provided, including the following:
• Client’s name
• ‹‹Medical record and HAP Identification Numbers››
• Date of insertion
• Type of IUC or implant
• Lot number of the device or product
[[page 23]]
prov enroll res
23
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2024
All IUCs and implants inserted through the Family PACT Program must be FDA-approved
devices, labeled for use in the United States, and obtained from FDA-approved distributors.
Providers must maintain invoices for insertion kits billed to Family PACT for at least three (3)
years from the date of the invoice (W&I Code, section 24005 [7][p]).
Electronic Claims Submission and Recordkeeping
Providers or their agents who electronically submit claims via Computer Media Claims
(CMC) must retain sufficient data to meet all recordkeeping requirements, including every
document, record and/or printed representation of information on which the provider relies to
submit a claim.
Family PACT Accuracy and Correction of Claims or Payments
Family PACT providers are responsible for all claims submitted regardless of who completes
the claim on behalf of the provider. Family PACT providers are responsible for the review
and verification of the accuracy of claims payment information promptly upon the receipt of
any payment. The Family PACT provider agrees to seek correction of any claim errors
through the appropriate processes as designated by the DHCS or its fiscal intermediary. For
more information, refer to Part I Medi-Cal manual.
Non-Medi-Cal Clinics
As defined in the California Code of Regulations (CCR), Title 22, Section 51115(b),
community clinics, free clinics, county operated organized outpatient clinics, Rural Health
Clinics (RHC) and other clinics that are not enrolled in the Medi-Cal Program as an
“organized outpatient clinic with surgical facilities” may not bill Family PACT for emergency,
examining and treatment rooms. This includes HCPCS codes Z7500, Z7506, Z7508, Z7510
and Z7512, as defined by CCR, Title 22, Section 51509.1. A Family PACT provider must
have the appropriate provider type on file with Medi-Cal PED to bill for facility use.
[[page 24]]
prov enroll res
24
Family PACT – Provider Enrollment and Responsibilities
Page updated: July 2024
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.
* Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
prohibits discrimination on the above categories marked with an asterisk.
Discrimination on the basis of the other categories is prohibited by
Government Code section 11135.