[[page 1]]
client elig
1
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2023
‹‹The following section contains the administrative practices of the enrolled Family Planning,
Access, Care and Treatment (Family PACT) provider for determining client eligibility and
certifying clients for the Family PACT Program.
Provider Responsibility for Eligibility Determination
A Family PACT Program provider, through the Family PACT provider enrollment process,
accepts the responsibility for appropriate onsite, synchronous video, or audio-only
synchronous determination of eligible clients according to program guidelines and
administrative practices. Eligibility determination via any asynchronous modality is not
allowed. Only enrolled Family PACT providers may determine client eligibility and enroll
Family PACT clients. Eligibility determination is a provider administrative function that is not
reimbursable under the Family PACT Program. Time spent enrolling or recertifying clients
into the Family PACT Program is not a billable service, regardless of the modality used. Any
provider who includes time spent on eligibility determination in the CPT® and HCPCS codes
billed to Family PACT for Evaluation and Management (E&M) and Education and
Counseling (E&C) office visits will be subject to disenrollment. Medi-Cal pharmacies and
laboratories may not perform eligibility determination or enroll clients. Information reported
by the client about health care coverage, family size and income are used by the provider to
determine eligibility. The client must meet all of the eligibility criteria outlined in this section.
A Family PACT provider is prohibited from exchanging, and/or offering to exchange,
anything of value in an effort to induce or reward the referral of, or application to, the Family
PACT Program. Failure to adhere to this policy will result in disenrollment from Family
PACT.
Remote Eligibility Determination
A Family PACT provider may enroll and recertify clients through synchronous video or
audio-only synchronous telehealth modalities. For purposes of this section, “synchronous”
means a real-time interaction between the client and a provider located at a distant site, in
accordance with Section 2290.5(a)(5) of the Business and Professions Code.
The following apply when utilizing synchronous modalities:
• A provider may complete the Client Eligibility Certification (CEC) form (DHCS 4461)
and Retroactive Eligibility Certification (REC) form (DHCS 4001), if applicable, on
behalf of the applicant/client.
• The provider is required to complete each field on the CEC form (DHCS 4461) and
REC form (DHCS 4001) on behalf of the client based on the applicant/client’s
responses. The CEC form (DHCS 4461) or REC form (DHCS 4001) must not be
prepopulated.››
[[page 2]]
client elig
2
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2023
• ‹‹Providers have the following options to obtain an applicant/client’s signature when
the individual is not in-person:
1. Recorded oral signature: Providers must ensure that they are able to collect an
audio or video recording that can be stored in the client’s medical record and
retrieved upon request. Providers may use either of the following two options for
audio or video-recorded signatures.
a. Recording only the signature portion of the audio or video synchronous
interaction. When recording only the signature portion of the interaction, providers
must record the portion of the interaction where the applicant/client acknowledges
and confirms that all information provided is true and correct under penalty of
perjury, where the applicant/client providers their understanding that the oral
signature holds the same weight as a written signature, and where the
applicant/client provides their oral signature; or
b. Recording the entire audio or video synchronous interaction with the oral signature
included.
Regardless of the option providers choose, providers must obtain consent and inform the
applicant/client which portion of the audio/video synchronous interaction is being recorded,
and ensure they are able to store and easily access audio or video-recorded signatures in
the client’s medical record or securely store a recorded oral signature and document its
location in the client’s medical record.
2. Electronic signature: Providers may obtain an electronic signature. Consistent with
the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act, California Civil Code Section 1633.2, an
“electronic signature” is an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to or
logically associated with an electronic record and executed or adopted by a person
with the intent to sign the electronic record. An electronic signature includes a
“digital signature,” defined in subdivision (d) of Section 16.5 of the Government
Code, to mean an electronic identifier, created by computer, intended by the party
using it to have the same force and effect as the use of a manual signature.
Regardless of the type of electronic signature collected, providers must ensure that they are
able to store and/or easily access documentation of the electronic signature in the client’s
medical record.››
[[page 3]]
client elig
3
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
• Regardless of the method used to obtain the signature on the CEC form (DHCS 4461)
or REC form (DHCS 4001), providers must recite the Privacy Statement and ensure
the applicant/client was:
1. Informed of the California health insurance affordability programs through Covered
California.
2. Offered a copy of the Notice of Privacy Practices. Providers must document the date
the Notice was received or declined in the client’s medical record.
3. Offered a copy of the Nondiscrimination Policy. Providers must document the date
the Policy was received or declined in the client’s medical record.
4. If applicable, provide the original REC form (DHCS 4001).
Family PACT providers must arrange for the client to receive the Notice of Privacy Practices,
Nondiscrimination Policy, and REC form (DHCS 4001), if applicable. Options include, but
are not limited to, in-person pick up, sending via electronic mail, mailing to the client’s home
or mailing address, or any other HIPAA-compliant manner (e.g., patient portal). If a client
elects to receive the Notice of Privacy Practices, Nondiscrimination Policy, or REC form
(DHCS 4001) through the mail, the provider must receive and document the express
consent of the client to mail it and must ensure that the address is verified as a valid
address.
• The provider or designee must sign the CEC form (DHCS 4461) or REC form (DHCS
4001).
• The original CEC form (DHCS 4461) and a copy of the REC form (DHCS 4001) must
be maintained in the client’s medical record.
• ‹‹Family PACT providers must provide the client with their Health Access Programs
(HAP) Identification Number and arrange for the client to receive their HAP
Identification Number to ensure a client has continued access to pharmacy, laboratory
services, and other Family PACT covered benefits. Options include, but are not limited
to, in-person pick up or mailing to the client’s home or mailing address. If the HAP
Identification Number is mailed, the provider must receive and document the express
consent of the client to mail it and must ensure that the address is verified as a valid
address.››
• If the applicant/client is deemed ineligible for Family PACT, the applicant/client must
receive a copy of the CEC form (DHCS 4461), which includes the Fair Hearing Rights.
Options include, but are not limited to, in-person pick up, sending via electronic mail, or
mailing to the client’s home or mailing address. If mailed, the provider must receive
and document the express consent of the client to mail it and must ensure that the
address is verified as a valid address.
[[page 4]]
client elig
4
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
All administrative practices for determining client eligibility as noted in this section, including
how to certify clients as eligible for the Family PACT Program, also apply to remote eligibility
determination unless otherwise stated.
Eligible Clients
To be eligible for Family PACT benefits, clients must meet all of the following criteria:
• The client must be a resident of California.
• The client must have a total taxable family income at or below 200 percent of the
federal poverty guidelines.
• The client must have no other source of health care coverage for family planning
services, or meet the criteria specified for eligibility with Other Health Coverage (OHC).
For more information, refer to “Eligible Clients with Other Health Coverage” on a
following page.
• The client must have a medical necessity for family planning services.
Ineligible Individuals
An individual is not eligible for Family PACT benefits for any of the following reasons:
• The individual is not a California resident.
• The individual has a total taxable family income that is more than 200 percent of the
federal poverty guidelines.
• The individual has full-scope Medi-Cal.
• The individual has Medi-Cal with a Share of Cost (SOC) that is met on the date of
services.
• The individual is enrolled in a Medi-Cal managed care health plan.
• The individual has OHC, including Medi-Cal for family planning services and a barrier
to access their OHC does not exist. For more information, refer to “Eligible Clients with
Other Health Coverage (OHC),” outlined in this section.
• The individual does not have a medical necessity for family planning services.
• The individual is an inmate of public institution, including prison, jail or juvenile
detention center. For more information, refer to the Eligibility: Special Groups section in
the Part 1 Medi-Cal manual.
• The individual does not meet the condition in “Affirming Eligibility Each Visit” stated on
a following page.
[[page 5]]
client elig
5
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
A provider or designee must affirm the individual’s eligibility at each visit (this does not
require a new Health Access Programs Family PACT Program Client Eligibility Certification
(CEC) form (DHCS 4461). If an individual previously determined ineligible returns to a
Family PACT provider, a new Health Access Programs Family PACT Program Client
Eligibility Certification (CEC) form (DHCS 4461) must be completed to determine eligibility.
Eligibility Period
‹‹The period of eligibility begins on the day the client is certified by the Family PACT provider
as meeting the eligibility requirements and the Health Access Programs (HAP) Identification
Number is activated for the Family PACT Program››. Family PACT clients are certified for
the program for a maximum of 12 months or until the client’s eligibility status changes,
whichever comes first. Twelve months represents 365 days (for example, February 4, 2007,
through February 3, 2008). A new Health Access Programs Family PACT Program Client
Eligibility Certification (CEC) form (DHCS 4461) must be completed on an annual basis for
the client to continue to be enrolled if the client continues to meet all eligibility criteria. Family
PACT must not be billed for services provided prior to the date of a client’s certification for
program enrollment.
Retroactive Eligibility
Once a new client is certified eligible for Family PACT, the provider asks the client if he or
she received Family PACT covered family planning and/or reproductive health services
during the three-month period prior to the month that the client was enrolled in the Family
PACT Program. If the client responds affirmatively, the Family PACT provider will give the
client retroactive eligibility information and a Health Access Programs Family PACT Program
Retroactive Eligibility Certification (REC) form (DHCS 4001) for completion.
Note: Only the client is responsible for claim submission.
Retroactive eligibility is determined separately for each of the three calendar months
preceding the month of certification. Eligibility is for the entire month. For example, if
retroactive eligibility is determined for a client on April 15, 2011, the client may be eligible
back to January 1, 2011.
Notice of Eligibility Determination
All applicants for Family PACT services must be verbally informed of their eligibility or
ineligibility at the time of the certification or recertification. Clients who are ineligible must be
offered a copy of the completed CEC form (DHCS 4461) and the original REC form (DHCS
4001), if applicable, which includes a “Fair Hearing Rights” notification. The client must be
informed of the fair hearing request process both verbally as well as in writing.
[[page 6]]
client elig
6
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
Client Notification
At the time the client presents for family planning services, the provider must verbally advise
the client of the following:
• The Family PACT eligibility requirements.
• The Family PACT scope of benefits: The Family PACT Program is limited to family
planning and family planning-related reproductive health services. It is not a primary
care program.
• The confidential nature of the information received, including the fact that parents,
spouse or partner will not be contacted without the client’s consent, if requested.
• The right to request a fair hearing. Refer to the “Fair Hearing Rights” on the Health
Access Programs Family PACT Program Client Eligibility Certification (CEC) form
(DHCS 4461), and
• California health insurance affordability programs through Covered California: Per
Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I Code), Section 24005(u), providers or the enrolling
entity shall make available to all applicants, prior to or concurrent with enrollment,
information on the manner in which to apply for insurance affordability programs. This
includes, but is not limited to, the Family PACT provider providing a paper copy of the
single application for Covered California or Medi-Cal coverage upon the client’s
request. Family PACT providers are not required to provide applicants with assistance
in completing the single form application. If the applicant requests assistance,
providers may direct them to:
– Online: (www.coveredca.com)
– Phone: 1-800-300-1506 (TTY 1-888-889-4500)
– Covered California Customer Service Center
– In person: A listing of trained Certified Enrollment Counselors, Certified Insurance
Agents and local county social services offices can be found at www.coveredca.com
or by calling 1-800-300-1506
Affirming Eligibility Each Visit
A provider or designee must affirm client eligibility at each visit. A client’s income, family size
and health insurance status must be reaffirmed. The client must be asked to present
evidence of OHC, such as health program ID cards.‹‹If there is a change in any information
contained on the CEC form (DHCS 4461), the provider must update the Family PACT Portal.
If a client is determined to be no longer eligible for Family PACT, providers must deactivate
the HAP Identification Number in the Family PACT Portal and verbally notify the client of the
change in eligibility and HAP Identification Number deactivation.››
[[page 7]]
client elig
7
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
Confidentiality Requirements
Names and all information concerning the condition or circumstance of any person(s) from
whom or about whom information is obtained are to be kept confidential. All information
about personal facts and circumstances obtained by the provider shall be treated as
privileged communications, shall be held confidential and shall not be divulged without the
individual’s written consent, except as required by law or as may be necessary to provide
emergency services to the individual, or as required by the Department of Health Care
Services (DHCS) to administer the Family PACT Program.
Information may be disclosed in summary, statistical or other forms that do not identify
particular individuals. The applicant, client, their attorney or other authorized representative
may inspect the client’s certification records maintained by the provider.
Consent of Parents or Others Not Required
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the provision of family planning services does
not require the consent of anyone other than the person who is to receive services. In
determining eligibility for minors, the State will exclude parental income. Minors may apply
for family planning services on the basis of their need for these services, without parental
consent, according to California Family Code Section 6925, subd. (a), Welfare and
Institutions Code (W&I Code), Section 24003, subd. (b). If a client is 17 years of age or
younger, the client is considered a minor. A minor who is 12 years of age or older may
consent to medical care related to the diagnosis, treatment and/or prevention of sexually
transmitted infections (STIs) according to California Family Code Section 6926, et seq.
Client Eligibility Forms
Providers must use the CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS 4001), if applicable,
to certify a client as eligible for Family PACT benefits. The CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC
form (DHCS 4001) are legal documents of eligibility determination and must be completed
correctly, as described in this section, in order for Family PACT to reimburse benefits.
‹‹English and Spanish versions of the CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS 4001)
are available from the California MMIS Fiscal Intermediary››. These are official state forms
and must be reproduced without alteration. No other forms are acceptable in substitution for
CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS 4001). It is the responsibility of the provider
to make copies of these forms for subsequent use. The current forms may be obtained in
these ways:
• The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) website at www.dhcs.ca.gov –
“Forms” (by Program) link on the “Forms and Publications” web page.
• The Family PACT website at www.familypact.org – “Forms” link under “the Providers
tab.
[[page 8]]
client elig
8
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
Clients must independently complete the CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS
4001), if applicable. Providers may not complete the forms on behalf of the client unless
eligibility is being determined through an audio or video synchronous modality (refer to
Remote Eligibility Determination in this section). The CEC form (DHCS 4461) or REC form
(DHCS 4001) must not be prepopulated by the provider. However, providers are permitted to
provide assistance or accommodations for clients who need help completing the forms,
either due to language barriers or mental, developmental or physical disabilities. This
includes difficulty of any kind reading or understanding what is being asked of them. Clients
may ask questions for clarification purposes only. Providers must proactively assess if the
client understands the form and that all questions have been answered appropriately.
Clients must complete all fields of CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS 4001). If
the client does not have an income, it should be noted as a “zero” or “0” on the CEC form
(DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS 4001).
‹‹Automated Eligibility Systems
Providers who requested to utilize an automated eligibility system to determine eligibility for
multiple recipient programs will no longer be able to utilize this process as of
February 3, 2025. All Family PACT client enrollment, changes and deactivations must be
completed exclusively through the Family PACT Portal.››
Signatures Required
For in-person client eligibility determination, the client must complete and sign the CEC form
(DHCS 4461) and the REC form (DHCS 4001), if applicable, and the provider or designee
must sign the form. California Government Code Section 16.5 allows for signatures to be
captured electronically. Providers opting to capture signatures electronically when the
individual is not in-person (refer to Remote Eligibility Determination in this section) should
assure that they are in full compliance with GC Section 16.5 and with California Code of
Regulations (CCR) Title 2, Division 7, Chapter 10.
[[page 9]]
client elig
9
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2023
Social Security Number
Family PACT providers are required to ask for a client’s Social Security Number (SSN). If
the client does not provide the SSN, the client’s stated reason why it is not available must be
documented on the CEC form (DHCS 4461) in the Social Security Number box. Providers
shall not deny access to family planning services if the client is unable or unwilling to provide
an SSN.
Client Responsibilities
Each person seeking family planning services from Family PACT must:
• ‹‹Complete a CEC form (DHCS 4461). Eligibility is based on the client’s
self-declaration of total taxable monthly income, family size, other source of health
care coverage and California residency, signed under penalty of perjury. CEC form
(DHCS 4461) completion is required during the initial eligibility session and annually
thereafter.››
• Sign the CEC form (DHCS 4461), certifying the accuracy of information provided.
• Report on the CEC form (DHCS 4461) all of the facts that are pertinent to the
determination of eligibility and certification for services.
• Report at each family planning visit any changes in the facts pertinent to their eligibility
determination (family size, total taxable family income, California residence, and
medical necessity for family planning services) and any changes in the client’s
demographic information.
• Report any entitlement to other health care coverage for family planning benefits to the
provider at the time of application, recertification or at any time the health care
coverage changes.
• Complete and sign a REC form (DHCS 4001), if applicable.
• Submit REC form (DHCS 4001) within one year of receipt of services or within 90 days
after certification of retroactive eligibility, whichever is longer. To file the claim, the
client must call or write Medi-Cal at:
Department of Health Care Services
Beneficiary Services Center
P.O. Box 138008
Sacramento, CA 95813-8008
(916) 403-2007
TDD: (916) 635-6491
[[page 10]]
client elig
10
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2023
Determination of Client Eligibility
The steps for determining client eligibility are as follows:
• Determine if the client is a Medi-Cal recipient with full-scope family planning coverage,
or if the client has OHC for family planning services. At each visit, a client with a
Medi-Cal Benefits Identification Card (BIC) must be screened for eligibility and the
provider must bill the Medi-Cal program if the client is Medi-Cal eligible for family
planning benefits and has met all SOC on the date of service. Medi-Cal payment
sources should always be billed, if applicable.
• Determine the age of the client. If the client is 17 years of age or younger, the client is
considered a minor. If the client is 18 years of age or older, the client is considered an
adult. In determining eligibility for minors, the State will exclude parental income.
• Determine the family size. The “basic family unit” must be taken into account when
determining family size. The “basic family unit” consists of the applicant, spouse
(including common-law) and minor children, if any, related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, and residing in the same household.
• If an applicant intends to file taxes and is not claimed as a tax dependent, the
applicant’s basic family unit includes the applicant, spouse if living together and the
applicant’s tax dependents. When adults, other than spouses, reside together, each
person shall be considered a separate family. This also applies to adults living with
their parents, unless the parents claim the adult child as a tax dependent. If an
applicant is claimed as a tax dependent by the applicant’s spouse or parents, the
applicant’s basic family unit include the applicant, spouse if living together, the tax filer
and the tax filer’s other tax dependents.
Note: California recognizes “common-law” marriages established in other states
(where common-law marriages are legally recognized); it does not recognize
common-law marriages occurring in California.
• Determine the client’s total taxable family income. The client’s self-declaration must be
accepted without further verification.
• Find the client’s declared family size and total taxable income in “Income Eligibility
Guidelines” in this section. If the client’s income is at or below the maximum for their
declared family size, the client is eligible for Family PACT benefits when all the other
criteria are met.
[[page 11]]
client elig
11
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2026
• Once a new client has been certified eligible for Family PACT, the provider asks the
client if he or she has received Family PACT-covered family planning and/or
reproductive health services during the three-month period prior to the month that the
client was enrolled in the Family PACT Program. If the client has received services, the
Family PACT provider will give the client the retroactive eligibility information and the
REC form (DHCS 4001) for completion.
• The provider accepts responsibility for determination of retroactive eligibility. A copy of
the retroactive eligibility information and the completed REC form must be given to the
client for client claim processing.
Income Eligibility Guidelines
The federal poverty guidelines are updated annually by the federal government. Providers
are notified in the Family PACT Update bulletin. ‹‹The income eligibility guidelines for the
Family PACT Program reflect the federal poverty guidelines as published, effective
April 1, 2026.››
Family PACT Income Eligibility Guidelines
‹‹200 Percent of the 2026 Federal Poverty Guidelines ››
Number of Persons in
Family/Household
Monthly Income
(in dollars)
Annual Income
(in dollars)
1 ‹‹$2,660›› ‹‹$31,920››
2 ‹‹$3,608›› ‹‹$43,280››
3 ‹‹$4,554›› ‹‹$54,640››
4 ‹‹$5,500›› ‹‹$66,000››
5 ‹‹$6,448›› ‹‹$77,360››
6 ‹‹$7,394›› ‹‹$88,720››
7 ‹‹$8,340›› ‹‹$100,080››
8 ‹‹$9,288›› ‹‹$111,440››
For each additional member,
add
‹‹$948›› ‹‹$11,360››
[[page 12]]
client elig
12
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2023
Family Size and Income
The following are instructions for completing the family size and income Eligibility
Determination component on the CEC form (DHCS 4461) and/or REC form (DHCS 4001), if
applicable.
• The client designates himself/herself as “self” and lists all “basic family unit” members
who live with him/her and are supported by the family income. For the definition of
“basic family unit,” refer to “Determination of Client Eligibility” on a previous page.
• The client fills in the source of income for each family member with earned or
unearned income. If the client does not work for one easily identifiable employer (that
is, a company), a general descriptive phrase will suffice as a response. For example, if
the client is a migrant farm worker, the place of employment could be “local farms.”
• The client determines the total family size and the total gross monthly income. For
minors, the State will exclude parental income.
Total Taxable Family Income
“Total Taxable Family Income” means the monthly sum of taxable income received by an
individual and the individual’s basic family unit identified by the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) as taxable. Monthly taxable income for migrant farm workers and other seasonally
employed persons may be computed by averaging total taxable income received during the
previous 12 months.
The following are types of taxable income identified by the IRS:
• Wages or salary
• Net income (profit) from farm and non-farm self-employment
• Social Security (even if not taxable)
• Dividends, interest (on savings or bonds), income from estates or trusts, net rental
income or royalties
• Pension and annuities
• Unemployment compensation/disability insurance
• Veterans’ pension (if taxable)
• Alimony received
[[page 13]]
client elig
13
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2023
Exclusions From Computation of Monthly Taxable Income
The following are not considered sources of monthly taxable income according to the IRS:
• Public Assistance or welfare payments
• Workers’ compensation
• Child support
• Alimony paid
• Money received from sale of property, such as stocks, bonds, a house or a car (unless
the person was engaged in the business of selling such property, in which case the net
proceeds would be counted as income from self-employment)
• Withdrawals of bank deposits, money borrowed, tax refunds, gifts or capital gains
• Lump-sum inheritances or insurance payment
• Loans and grants, such as scholarships, obtained and used under conditions that
preclude their use for current living costs
• Any grant or loan to any undergraduate student for educational purposes made or
insured under any program administered by the Commissioner of Education under the
Higher Education Act
• The value of the food stamp coupon allotment in excess of the amount paid for the
coupons
• The value of USDA-donated foods
• The value of supplemental food assistance under the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 and
the special food program under the National School Lunch Act
• Earnings of a child if less than the threshold for being required to file taxes
• Per capita payments to or funds held in trust for any individual in satisfaction of a
judgment of the Indian Claims Commission or Court of Claims
• Payments made pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act to the extent
such payments are exempt from taxation under Section 21(a) of the Act
• Any payment received under the Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property
Acquisition Policies Act of 1970
• Home produce utilized for household consumption
• Payments received under the Energy Crisis Assistance Program or the Low Income
Energy Assistance Program
[[page 14]]
client elig
14
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
Certification of Client Eligibility
‹‹Providers shall use the Family PACT Portal for certifying clients as eligible and for
activating the client’s HAP Identification Number. The Family PACT Portal also allows
providers to inquire, update, recertify and deactivate client eligibility. For more information,
refer to the Health Access Programs (HAP) section of this manual.››
Providers or their designees certify clients as eligible for the Family PACT Program by
checking the Eligible for Family PACT Program box and signing and dating the Health
Access Programs Family PACT Program Client Eligibility Certification (CEC) form (DHCS
4461) and Health Access Programs Family PACT Program Retroactive Eligibility
Certification (REC) form (DHCS 4001), if applicable, affirming that:
• The CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS 4001), if applicable, are complete.
• The client’s county of residence is within California.
• The client’s eligibility is based upon medical necessity for family planning services.
• The client’s family size and income place them at or below 200 percent of federal
poverty guidelines.
• The client has no other source of health care coverage for family planning services.
• The client has signed and dated the CEC form (DHCS 4461) and REC form (DHCS
4001), if applicable or the provider has obtained an applicant/client’s signature when
the individual is not in-person (refer to Remote Eligibility Determination in this section).
When clients do not meet these requirements, providers or their designees certify ineligibility
by checking the Ineligible for Family PACT Program box, dating and signing the CEC form
(DHCS 4461) and/or the REC form (DHCS 4001), if applicable. Failure to adequately certify
the client or to sign and date the CEC form (DHCS 4461) may result in the disenrollment of
the provider from the Family PACT Program.
Note: Clinic staff who are eligible and wish to enroll in the Family PACT Program may not
certify their own eligibility or enroll themselves as clients in the program.
Providers must maintain the completed CEC form (DHCS 4461), whether the client is
eligible or ineligible, and a copy of the REC form (DHCS 4001) if applicable, in the client’s
medical record for a period of at least three years in accordance with Welfare and
Institutions Code (W&I Code), Section 14124.1. The CEC form (DHCS 4461), and REC form
(DHCS 4001), if applicable, may be maintained electronically, in compliance with all aspects
of Health & Safety Code, Section 123149.
[[page 15]]
client elig
15
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2023
Client Eligibility Certification Codes
The Family PACT Program Client Eligibility Certification Codes table is used to complete
specific items on the CEC form (DHCS 4461). Accurately entering the corresponding code is
necessary when activating eligibility, updating HAP records or recertifying client eligibility.
Family PACT Program
Client Eligibility Certification Codes Table
County of Residence
County Code
Alameda 01
Alpine 02
Amador 03
Butte 04
Calaveras 05
Colusa 06
Contra Costa 07
Del Norte 08
El Dorado 09
Fresno 10
Glenn 11
Humboldt 12
Imperial 13
Inyo 14
Kern 15
Kings 16
Lake 17
Lassen 18
Los Angeles 19
Madera 20
Marin 21
Mariposa 22
Mendocino 23
Merced 24
Modoc 25
Mono 26
Monterey 27
Napa 28
Nevada 29
Orange 30
County of Residence
County Code
Placer 31
Plumas 32
Riverside 33
Sacramento 34
San Benito 35
San Bernardino 36
San Diego 37
San Francisco 38
San Joaquin 39
San Luis Obispo 40
San Mateo 41
Santa Barbara 42
Santa Clara 43
Santa Cruz 44
Shasta 45
Sierra 46
Siskiyou 47
Solano 48
Sonoma 49
Stanislaus 50
Sutter 51
Tehama 52
Trinity 53
Tulare 54
Tuolumne 55
Ventura 56
Yolo 57
Yuba 58
Unknown 99
Social Security Number
Not Provided
Definition Code
Client does not
know SSN
01
Client does not
have SSN
02
Client declined
to answer
03
Other Health Coverage
Codes
Definition Code
Yes 01
No 02
[[page 16]]
client elig
16
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: January 2025
Family PACT Program
Client Eligibility Certification Codes Table (continued):
Deactivation Codes
Code Definition
01 Not resident of California
02 Over 200 percent of the federal poverty level
03 Sterilized, no longer contracepting
04 Health insurance coverage for family planning services
05 Full-scope Medi-Cal (does not have an unmet Share of Cost)
06 ‹‹Deactivation of HAP Identification Number››
Third-Party Payment Sources
Clients with third-party payment sources are those who present with coverage from other
sources of payment for family planning services, including Medi-Cal, prepaid health plans,
military or private health insurance. If coverage is intermittent, status at the time of
certification determines eligibility. The status of the client’s enrollment in a third-party
payment source must be updated at each visit to determine continued eligibility in Family
PACT.
Chart Documentation Requirements
Providers must document in the client’s record if the person requesting family planning
services has financial coverage for such services under any third-party payment source. If
so, that source of funding must be billed for the family planning services and the billing must
be documented in the client’s file.
[[page 17]]
client elig
17
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2025
Clients with Benefits Identification Cards
If the client has a Benefits Identification Card (BIC), the provider must determine if the client
is eligible for Medi-Cal family planning benefits on the date of service and if the recipient has
met any required Share of Cost (SOC). For more information, refer to “Ineligible Clients” on
a previous page. See the following sample BICs. ‹‹Any of the four card types are valid.
Providers should accept all four BIC designs and must continue to verify eligibility
accordingly.››
Figure 1: Front of BIC printed in blue with sex indicator
Figure 2: Front of BIC printed in full color with sex indicator
[[page 18]]
client elig
18
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: July 2025
Figure 3: Front of BIC printed in full color without sex indicator
‹‹Figure 4: Front of BIC printed in full color with Medi-Cal
logo on the header››
Eligible Clients with Other Health Coverage (OHC)
Clients who have Other Health Coverage (OHC), including Medi-Cal fee-for-service and
managed care, can be eligible for Family PACT benefits. Clients must meet all Family PACT
eligibility criteria described under “Eligible Clients” on a previous page, including any of the
following:
• The OHC does not cover any contraceptive methods. Seeking a specific method or
brand of birth control not offered by OHC is not a criterion for Family PACT eligibility.
• The client is a student who has no health care coverage for any contraceptive
methods. Seeking a specific method or brand of birth control not offered by OHC is not
a criterion for Family PACT eligibility.
[[page 19]]
client elig
19
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: August 2025
• The OHC requires an annual deductible that the client is unable to meet on the date of
service.
Note: If the OHC is health insurance with an insurance copayment per visit, the client is not
eligible for Family PACT benefits. The provider should collect the copayment, render
services and bill the third party insurance.
• A barrier to access exists. A barrier to access is when a client’s OHC does not ensure
provision of family planning services to a client without his or her spouse, partner or
parents being notified or informed. For clients who indicate on the CEC form (DHCS
4461) that their concern of a partner, spouse, or parent learning about their family
planning appointment may keep them from using their OHC, there is a barrier to
access, and the clients are eligible for Family PACT benefits if they meet all other
eligibility criteria. This applies to all clients regardless of age or marital status.
• The client has a Medi-Cal unmet SOC on the date of service.
• The client has limited-scope Medi-Cal that does not cover family planning.
Clients Enrolled in Medi-Cal Managed Care
When Medi-Cal managed care enrolled members seek family planning care outside of a
designated health plan, the health plans are required to reimburse qualified out-of-plan
family planning providers for family planning services as well as laboratory and pharmacy
services related to family planning. Family PACT providers should serve Medi-Cal managed
care clients and then bill the managed care health plan rather than enrolling clients into
Family PACT. Seeking a specific method of birth control not covered by their health plan of
enrollment is not a criterion for eligibility in Family PACT. Providers may obtain more
detailed plan enrollment information for Medi-Cal managed care clients through Medi-Cal
online eligibility verification systems. Information about managed care plans and copies of
the policy letters cited in this section are available on the DHCS Medi-Cal Managed Care
Letters website.
[[page 20]]
client elig
20
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2025
Client Eligibility Determination Table
The following table assists providers in determining client eligibility
Client Information Family
PACT
Eligibility
Action Taken
Client has full-scope Medi-Cal with no Share of
Cost (SOC)
No No activation. Bill to
Medi-Cal
Client has Medi-Cal with an unmet SOC Yes Issue and activate HAP
Identification Number
Client has Medi-Cal with no SOC but client
indicates a barrier to access exists*
Yes Issue and activate HAP
Identification Number
Client has restricted services Medi-Cal (no
coverage of contraceptive methods).
Yes Issue and activate HAP
Identification Number
Client has OHC (covers contraceptive methods)
with no deductible.
No No activation. Bill
insurance
Client has OHC (Medi-Cal managed care with no
deductible and OHC covers contraceptive
methods, but client indicates a barrier to access
exists.*
Yes Issue and activate HAP
Identification Number
Client has OHC (covers contraceptive methods)
with an unmet deductible.
Yes Issue and activate HAP
Identification Number
Client has no health care coverage. Yes Issue and activate HAP
Identification Number
Client is enrolled in Medi-Cal managed care but
requests out-of-plan family planning services.
No No activation. Provide
services, bill for service to
plan
[[page 21]]
client elig
21
Family PACT – Client Eligibility
Page updated: April 2025
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.
* See “Eligible Clients with Other Health Coverage” on a previous page.