[[page 1]]
tar
1
Family PACT – Treatment Authorization Request (TAR)
Treatment Authorization Request (TAR)
Page updated: April 2023
This section includes authorization requirements for the Family PACT (Planning, Access,
Care and Treatment) Program. Family PACT providers request authorization using a
Treatment Authorization Request (TAR) form. ‹‹TARs, with documentation of medical
necessity, are used to obtain authorization for complication services, and for services that
exceed the limitations noted, including drugs.››
TAR Overview
For general TAR information and form completion instructions, refer to the following sections
in the Medi-Cal manuals.
• For general TAR information, refer to the TAR Overview section in the Part 1 manual.
• For TAR form completion instructions, refer to the TAR Completion section in the
Part 2 manual.
• For pharmacy authorization requirements, refer to the Medi-Cal Rx website
(https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov/).
Electronic Treatment Authorization Request (eTAR) Submission
Guidelines
The TAR processing system will accept electronic treatment authorization transactions via
the current electronic TAR (eTAR) system for Family PACT. Using the eTAR submission
process, providers can create, update, inquire and view responses for TARs online. In
addition, providers have access to the Code Search tool for code inquiries. Using eTAR
eliminates mail and paper processing time.
Note: Attachments for eTARs submitted via the attachment fax line (1-877-270-8779) must
have a completed TAR 3 Attachment form as the cover sheet or first page for
attachments.
[[page 2]]
tar
2
Family PACT – Treatment Authorization Request (TAR)
Page updated: April 2023
Providers submitting eTARs for Family PACT must enter the ICD-10-CM diagnosis code
without a decimal. For more information about eTAR submission, a tutorial is available on
the Medi-Cal Learning Portal (MLP) page of the Medi-Cal Providers website.
Paper TAR Submission
All paper TARs must be submitted to the TAR Processing Center at one of the following
addresses. ‹‹The TAR should be clearly marked “Family PACT” in the Medical Justification
field (Box 8c) of the TAR form.››
TAR Processing Center
820 Stillwater Road
West Sacramento, CA 95605-1630
TAR Processing Center
P.O. Box 13029
Sacramento, CA 95813-4029
Authorization for Complication Services
Treatment authorization is required for services needed to evaluate and manage a
complication, including office visits, procedures, facility use, laboratory, pharmacy and
radiology. Treatment authorization must be obtained by enrolled Family PACT providers and
all Medi-Cal providers who render Family PACT services by referral, including clinicians,
radiologists, laboratories, pharmacies, facilities and hospitals. Providers generally should
request authorization before rendering a service. For additional information about referring
clients to Medi-Cal providers for services, refer to the Provider Enrollment and
Responsibilities manual section.
Authorizations for drug substitutions are not allowed. Requests for drugs that are unrelated
to the services of the Family PACT Program will be denied.
[[page 3]]
tar
3
Family PACT – Treatment Authorization Request (TAR)
Page updated: August 2023
Outpatient Complication Services
Treatment authorization is required for outpatient services when:
• Complications are suspected or diagnosed that exceed the limitations noted for the
family planning (FP) and/or family planning-related services (FPRS). Complication
services, including pharmacy, are listed in the Benefits: Family Planning, Benefits:
Family Planning-Related Services and Clinic Formulary sections in this manual, and in
the Family PACT Pharmacy Formulary on the Medi-Cal Rx website
(https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov).
• A Family PACT provider refers the client to a non-Family PACT provider specialist or
consultant for evaluation and management of complications
Note: The consultant must be a Medi-Cal provider. Claims and TARs by a non-Family
PACT provider must include the referring provider’s NPI so the system can confirm
that the referring provider is enrolled in Family PACT.
• Laboratory services are needed for the evaluation and management of complications
as listed in the Benefits: Family Planning and Benefits: Family
Planning-Related Services sections in this manual.
• Radiology services are needed for the evaluation and management of complications
as listed in the Benefits: Family Planning Services and Benefits: Family Planning-
Related Services sections in this manual.
• Drugs and supplies listed in the Family PACT Pharmacy Formulary on the Medi-Cal Rx
website (https://medi-calrx.dhcs.ca.gov/) and the Clinic Formulary section in this
manual are needed for treatment of complications arising from a family planning or a
family planning-related visit.
‹‹Inpatient Services››
Emergency and inpatient care requires an authorized TAR for hospital days and medical
services. ‹‹Placement or insertion of a contraceptive device requiring emergency or inpatient
care, services for complications of contraceptive methods and/or complications of secondary
related reproductive health conditions, as defined by the Family PACT Program, are covered
services with an authorized TAR››.
[[page 4]]
tar
4
Family PACT – Treatment Authorization Request (TAR)
Page updated: December 2021
Code(s) and Modifier(s) on TAR and Claim Form Must Match
The procedure code(s) and modifier(s) on the claim must match the code(s) and modifier(s)
authorized on the TAR. Failure to do so may result in denial of the claim.
Diagnosis Coding and Other TAR Requirements
An ICD-10-CM code is required on all Family PACT TARs. A second ICD-10-CM code may
also be required. For additional information about coding for services to manage
complications, refer to the Benefits: Family Planning and Benefits: Family Planning-Related
Services sections in this manual.
[[page 5]]
tar
5
Family PACT – Treatment Authorization Request (TAR)
Page updated: December 2021
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.