[[page 1]]
claim cms
1
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: August 2020
The examples in this section assist providers billing for Family PACT (Planning, Access,
Care and Treatment) Program services on the CMS-1500 claim form. While Family PACT
claims are generally billed with the same method as Medi-Cal claims, there are some unique
differences for Family PACT. Providers should carefully read the information in this manual
concerning Family PACT ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes and documentation requirements.
Refer to Benefits: Family Planning and Benefits: Family Planning-Related Services sections
of this manual for detailed policy information.
Claim Completion Instructions Overview
For general claim completion instructions, refer to the following sections in the Part 2
Medi-Cal manual:
• Correct Coding Initiative: National
• CMS-1500 Completion
• CMS-1500 Special Billing Instructions
• CMS-1500 Submission and Timeliness Instructions
• CMS-1500 Tips for Billing
• Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC: CMS-1500 Billing Instructions
Claim Examples
This section includes examples of family planning and family planning-related services that
require appropriate ICD-10-CM coding for reimbursement. It also includes an example of
when two claim forms are required for the same date of service, because different additional
ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes are required for treatment services provided in a single visit.
Because these claims are submitted with a diagnosis code, an ICD indicator is required
between the dotted lines in the ICD Ind. area of Box 21. An indicator is required only when
an ICD-10-CM/PCS code is entered on the claim.
Note: These are examples only. National Drug Code (NDC) numbers and charges used for
the examples may be fictitious or outdated and are not intended for use on the actual
claim form. Adapt to your billing situation.
Billing Tips
When completing claims, do not enter the decimal point in any codes or dollar amounts. If
requested information does not fit neatly in the Additional Claim Information (Box 19) of the
claim, type it on an 8½ x 11-inch sheet of paper and attach it to the claim.
[[page 2]]
claim cms
2
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: September 2021
Example 1
Evaluation and Management (E&M) office visit, blood draw for laboratory
screening tests and onsite dispensing of oral contraceptives
‹‹In this example, an established client, who is currently using oral contraceptives, has a
history update and a blood pressure check. A full year supply of oral contraceptives is
dispensed onsite. Samples for a gonorrhea/chlamydia nucleic acid amplification (NAAT) test,
syphilis, and HIV screening tests are sent to a clinical laboratory. The total clinician time for
this visit is 22 minutes; 15 minutes with the client and 7 minutes to review prior record and
enter a note in the electronic medical record.››
Both the product ID qualifier (N4) and National Drug Code (NDC) are required on the claim
because the oral contraceptive dispensed (claim line 2) is a “physician-administered” drug.
Providers enter the product ID qualifier/NDC number in the shaded area of Box 24A and the
unit of measure/numeric quantity for the contraceptive in the shaded area of Box 24D.
Note that: 1) Unit of measure and numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two
elements will not result in claim denial. And 2) Section 340B drugs may be billed on the
same claim as non-340B drugs, but the 340B drugs must include modifier UD with the
applicable HCPCS and NDC codes. Refer to the appropriate Part 2 manual section
Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC: CMS-1500 Billing Instructions for details on NDC and
340B billing requirements.
[[page 3]]
claim cms
3
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: May 2023
Example 2
Initial visit with point of care laboratory work and a blood draw sent to an
outside laboratory (a prescription for contraceptives and antibiotic is
provided).
In this example, a client has a new patient family planning office visit, which includes a
comprehensive patient history, clinically indicated physical exam and counseling about all
family planning methods. A point of care pregnancy test is performed because of unclear
last menstrual period. A dipstick urinalysis is performed in the office for symptoms of urinary
tract infection (UTI). The client is given a prescription for oral contraceptives and an
antibiotic for the treatment of acute cystitis. The physician dispenses condoms as a back-up
method and for sexually transmitted disease (STD) prevention.
Note: Contraceptive supply codes A4267 and A4269U1 are exempt from being billed in
connection with a National Drug Code (NDC).
[[page 4]]
claim cms
4
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: October 2025
Example 3
A vasectomy performed by a Medi-Cal provider who is not enrolled in
Family PACT (client was referred by a Family PACT provider)
In this example, a client is referred by a Family PACT provider to a non-Family PACT
Medi-Cal provider for a vasectomy. The vasectomy is performed in the doctor’s office. In
addition to the vasectomy, the surgeon bills for supplies required for the procedure.
Referring Provider
‹‹The referring Family PACT physician provides the surgeon with the information required to
complete the form, such as the client’s Health Access Programs (HAP) ID number, the
referring provider’s NPI, the appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnosis code, and a copy of the
Consent For Sterilization Form (DHCS 8649). Enter the referring provider’s name in the
Name of Referring Provider or Other Source field (Box 17) and the NPI in the NPI field (Box
17B).››
[[page 5]]
claim cms
5
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: September 2021
Example 4
A colposcopy and vaginal discharge diagnostic test (two claim forms
required)
‹‹In an initial visit, a client, who received depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) for
contraception, had a cervical cytology screening test done. The result was reported a few
days later as a high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL).›› This example shows a
follow-up office visit for a colposcopy with biopsy and endocervical curettage. ‹‹In addition, at
the same visit, she complains of a vaginal discharge.›› Office microscopy is performed and
the client is given a prescription to take to the pharmacy to treat trichomonal vulvovaginitis.
Two claim forms are required for the same date of service because there are two family
planning-related conditions requiring different diagnosis codes for each set of claims. Do not
use field 21.3 or 21.4 in the Diagnosis or Nature of Illness or Injury field (Box 21). Refer to
the following page for the second claim form.
[[page 6]]
claim cms
6
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: June 2022
‹‹Example 4 (continued)››
A colposcopy and vaginal discharge diagnostic test (second claim form)
(continued)
On the second claim form, (E&M) code 99213 with modifier 25 is used to identify a
separately identifiable E&M) visit above and beyond the other service provided (refer to the
first claim form on a preceding page).
‹‹It also includes an example of when two claim forms are required for the same date of
service, because different additional ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes are required for treatment
services provided in a single visit.››
[[page 7]]
claim cms
7
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: October 2025
Example 5
Bilateral tubal ligation performed by a Medi-Cal provider who is not
enrolled in Family PACT (client was referred by a Family PACT provider)
In this example, a non-Family PACT provider performs a laparoscopic tubal ligation. The
client was referred by a Family PACT provider. This example shows how the surgeon bills
for the procedure.
Referring Provider
‹‹The referring Family PACT physician provides the surgeon with the information required to
complete the form, such as the client’s HAP ID number, the referring provider’s NPI, the
family planning ICD-10-CM diagnosis code, and a copy of the sterilization Consent For
Sterilization Form (DHCS 8649). Enter the referring provider’s name in the Name of
Referring Provider or Other Source field (Box 17) and the NPI in the NPI field (Box 17B).››
[[page 8]]
claim cms
8
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: June 2022
Example ‹‹6››
Intrauterine contraceptive (IUC) removal and the start of oral
contraceptives on the same date of service (two claim forms required)
In this example, an established client requests for her expired IUC be removed and
discloses that she would like to start using oral contraceptives. The clinician provided 15
minutes of method contraceptive counseling. The total time of the visit (excluding the time
for the IUC removal) was 24 minutes.
Two claim forms are required for the same date of service because there are two
contraceptive management ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes.
Refer to the following page for the second claim form.
The first claim form should include the information below. Do not bill for an Evaluation and
Management (E&M) visit with IUC removal on the same date of service.
[[page 9]]
claim cms
9
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: October 2022
Example ‹‹6 (continued)››
Intrauterine contraceptive (IUC) removal and start of oral contraceptives
on same date of service (second claim form) (continued)
The second claim form includes the E&M code for the portion of the visit focusing on
contraceptive counseling and the prescription of the oral contraceptives dispensed onsite
(refer to the first claim form on the preceding page).
Both the product ID qualifier N4 and National Drug Code (NDC) are required on the claim
because the oral contraceptive dispensed (claim line 2) is a physician-administered drug
(PAD). Providers enter the product ID qualifier/NDC number in the shaded area of Box 24A
and the unit of measure/numeric quantity for the contraceptive in the shaded area of Box
24D. (Refer to Part 2, Medi-Cal Manual section Physician-Administered Drugs – NDC:
CMS-1500 Billing Instructions for help.)
Note: Unit of measure and numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two elements
will not result in claim denial.
[[page 10]]
claim cms
10
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: October 2022
Example ‹‹7››
Contraceptive implant insertion by a Medi-Cal provider who is not
enrolled in Family PACT (client was referred by a Family PACT group
provider)
In this example, a client is referred by a Family PACT group provider to a non-Family PACT
Medi-Cal provider for contraceptive implant insertion. A Nurse Practitioner (NP) performs the
procedure. This example shows how the rendering provider bills for the procedure. Enter the
supervising physician’s individual NPI in the NPI field on each applicable claim line (Box
24J). Enter the name of the NP, title, and the NP’s individual NPI number in Box 19.
Referring Provider
The referring Family PACT group provider provides the rendering provider with the
information required to complete the form, such as the client’s HAP ID number, the referring
provider’s group NPI, and the appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnosis code. Enter the referring
Family PACT group provider’s name in the Name of Referring Provider or Other Source field
(Box 17) and the NPI in the NPI field (Box 17B).
[[page 11]]
claim cms
11
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: October 2022
Example ‹‹8››
Office visit, Depo Medroxyprogesterone Acetate (DMPA) injection) onsite
administration for contraceptive use, 150 mg
In this example, a registered nurse who has completed the required training pursuant to
California Business and Professions Code, Section 2725.2, dispensed and administered
DMPA to an established client who is continuing on this contraceptive method.
Both the product ID qualifier N4 and National Drug Code (NDC) are required on the claim
because the drug dispensed (claim line 2) is a physician administered drug (PAD). (Refer to
Part 2, Medi-Cal Manual section Physician-Administered Drugs – NCD: CMS-1500 Billing
Instructions for additional help.)
Providers enter the product ID qualifier/NDC number in the shaded area of Box 24A, the unit
of measure/numeric quantity for the drug in the shaded area of Box 24D and must include
the modifier U8 in the modifier area (unshaded) of Box 24D. Note that unit of measure and
numeric quantity are optional. Absence of these two elements will not result in claim denial.
Note: Providers billing for physician-administered drugs subject to the federally established
340B Drug Pricing Program must include the modifier UD in the modifier area of Box
24D to the right of, or in second position to, modifier U8. Section 340B drugs may be
billed on the same claim as non-340B drugs.
[[page 12]]
claim cms
12
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: August 2022
The price listed for DMPA on the Medi-Cal Rates page of the Medi-Cal website includes a
one-time administration fee. Refer to the Drugs: Onsite Dispensing Billing Instructions
section of this manual for specific instructions on the one-time administration fee.
[[page 13]]
claim cms
13
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: October 2022
Example ‹‹9››
Initial visit with on-site dispensing of diaphragm (contoured)
In this example, a client has an initial family planning office visit, which includes a
comprehensive patient history, physical exam and counseling about all family planning
methods. As clinically indicated, point-of-care pregnancy test is performed. The physician
dispenses a contraceptive diaphragm (contoured), contraceptive jelly and condoms.
Note: Contraceptive supply codes A4266, A4267 and A4269UI are exempt from being
billed in connection with a National Drug Code (NDC).
[[page 14]]
claim cms
14
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: October 2022
Example ‹‹10››
Evaluation and Management (E&M) visit for pharmacist furnishing oral
contraceptives
In this example, a Family PACT client is seen by a pharmacist for the evaluation and
management service associated with furnishing the client with oral contraceptives. The
appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnosis code is indicated by D1D1D1 in this example. For detailed
instructions on how to complete a CMS-1500 claim form, providers should refer to the
CMS-1500 Completion section in the appropriate Part 2 Medi-Cal manual.
[[page 15]]
claim cms
15
Claim Completion: CMS-1500
Page updated: August 2022
Legend
Symbols used in the document above are explained in the following table.
Symbol Description
‹‹ This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change begins.
›› This is a change mark symbol. It is used to indicate where on the page the
most recent change ends.