[[page 1]]
1
C
ALENDAR YEAR 2024 TARGETED PROVIDER
RATE INCREASES FREQUENTLY ASKED
QUESTIONS
March 12, 2025
[[page 2]]
2
Background
1. What is the status of SPA 23-0035?
The Calendar Year (CY) 2024 targeted provider rate increases (TRI) were approved
by Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) on December 19, 2023,
through State Plan Amendment 23-0035.
2. What is the status of the Managed Care Organization Tax?
Assembly Bill (AB) 119 (Chapter 13, Statutes of 2023) authorized a Managed Care
Organization (MCO) tax eﬀective April 1, 2023, through December 31, 2026.
Revenues from the MCO tax will be used to support the Medi-Cal program
including targeted provider rate increases and other investments that advance
access, quality, and equity for Medi-Cal members and promote provider
participation in the Medi-Cal program. CMS formally approved the State of
California's MCO Tax on December 15, 2023. In addition, Senate Bill 136 (Chapter
6, Statutes of 2024) and AB 160 (Chapter 39, Statutes of 2024) authorized further
modiﬁcations to the MCO tax eﬀective January 1, 2024 which are pending CMS
approval.
3. Where will the rates be updated on DHCS’ website?
The TRI rates have been published on both the provider manual website
and the
Medi-Cal Targeted Provider Rate Increases and Investments website.
4. How were the TRI increases determined?
Pursuant to AB 118, the CY 2024 TRI Fee Schedule rate was calculated at the
greater of:
A. 87.5% of the lowest 2023 Medicare locality rate in California
B. The existing basic rate on the legacy Medi-Cal fee schedule eﬀective
December 31, 2023, plus any applicable Proposition 56 Physician Services
supplemental payment amount.
[[page 3]]
3
DHCS calculated an equivalent targeted rate for services that do not have a rate
established by Medicare. Codes on the CY 2024 TRI Fee Schedule will be exempt
from the AB 97 provider payment reduction.
Procedure Code Eligibility
5. What procedure codes qualify for TRI? Why do certain codes that are non-
beneﬁts appear on the TRI Fee Schedule?
Only codes listed on the TRI fee schedule are eligible for TRI increases. These
codes were selected based on their status as primary care, obstetric, and non-
specialty mental health services. Non-beneﬁt procedure codes are not published
on the monthly rate ﬁle. The TRI Fee Schedule does not supersede FFS beneﬁt
and billing policies described in the California Medicaid State Plan, Medi-Cal
Provider Manual, Medi-Cal Provider Bulletins, or Title 22, Division 3 of the
California Code of Regulations (CCR) including, but not limited to Beneﬁt
Restrictions, and Multiple Procedure Payment Reductions. Certain codes marked
with a "1" in the Beneﬁts Restriction column on the 2024 TRI fee schedule may
not be eligible for reimbursement without a Treatment Authorization Request
(TAR). For additional information, please see the TAR and Non-Beneﬁt
section of
the provider manual and the “Notes” tab in the 2024 TRI Fee Schedule located on
the
DHCS website. Due to the complexity of the provider manual and the nuance
between the Fee-for-Service (FFS) and the Managed Care requirements, DHCS
recommends that all entities refer to the TRI fee schedule (TRI Fee Schedule
v1.06.01082024) posted to the Medi-
Cal Targeted Provider Rate Increases and
Investments website.
6. How are Alternative Conversion Factors taken into consideration?
In the FFS delivery system, Medi-Cal will continue to reimburse services at no less
than the net reimbursement amount, inclusive of any alternative conversion
factors and supplemental payments, authorized pursuant to the California
Medicaid State Plan in eﬀect on December 31, 2023.
In the Managed Care delivery system, DHCS is not directing MCPs to pay legacy
rates calculated with alternative conversion factors in excess of the CY 2024 TRI
[[page 4]]
4
Fee Schedule rate, except for qualifying SB 94 comprehensive family planning
services.
7. What about Rate Adjustments? Are they taken into consideration in the TRI
fee schedule?
The CY 2024 TRI Fee Schedule rate is subject to further adjustment for speciﬁed
codes:
- 39.7% payment augmentation for speciﬁed physicians' services
provided to a Medi-Cal member eligible under the California Children's
Services program.
- 20% payment reduction for speciﬁed procedures performed in
outpatient facilities. The applicable codes are identiﬁed on the TRI Fee
Schedule. Please refer to the Notes tab for additional information.
Medi-Cal Targeted Rate Increase Fee Schedule effective dates of service January 1,
2024
Procedure
Code Description Category
Targeted
Provider
Rate
January
1, 2024
Benefit
Restrictions
Cutback
Indicator
CCS
Authorized
Physician
Service
10040 Acne
Surgery
Primary/General
Care $108.61 1 1
10060 Damage of
skin abscess
Primary/General
Care $109.05 1 1
10061 Draining of
skin abscess
Primary/General
Care $195.14 1
8. Does DHCS have any speciﬁc guidance on place of service (POS) codes that
are eligible for TRI?
Pursuant to the 2023 Budget Act and AB 118 (Chapter 42, Statutes of 2023),
DHCS implemented the ﬁrst phase of Targeted Rate Increases eﬀective January 1,
2024. The target rate for OB and NSMH procedure codes are reimbursed at the
TRI rate regardless of FI Claim Type (UB-04 and CMS-1500). For primary care
[[page 5]]
5
procedure codes, they are restricted to only FI Claim Type 05 (CMS-1500 form)
and eligible provider types. There are no additional place of service restrictions.
9. What happened to the Proposition 56 Physician’s Supplemental/Directed
Payments?
Eﬀective for dates of service on or after January 1, 2024, the CY 2024 TRI Fee
Schedule rates are inclusive of the former Proposition 56 Physician Services
supplemental payments for applicable codes. Pursuant to AB 118, the CY 2024
TRI Fee Schedule does not include procedure codes related to Proposition 56
dental, Proposition 56 family planning, or Proposition 56 abortion services.
Proposition 56 supplemental payments applicable to these services will not
change eﬀective January 1, 2024.
Provider Eligibility
10. Which providers are eligible?
Codes identiﬁed as primary/general care services on the TRI Fee Schedule and
billed using Health Insurance Claim Form (CMS-1500) are eligible for TRI only
when rendered by the following types of eligible providers: Physicians Physician
Assistants, Nurse Practitioners, Podiatrists, Certiﬁed Nurse Midwife, Licensed
Midwives, Doula Providers, Psychologists, Licensed Professional Clinical
Counselors, Licensed Clinical Social Workers, and Marriage and Family Therapists.
Codes identiﬁed as obstetric care services and non-specialty outpatient mental
health services are eligible for TRI when billed or rendered by a provider who is
otherwise eligible to bill the code.
11. Does provider specialty or taxonomy impact eligibility for TRI?
Provider taxonomy and specialty is not used to deﬁne eligibility for TRI. However,
MCPs may utilize taxonomy, specialty, or other datapoints as resources to
determine provider type. DHCS expects MCPs to work with Providers to identify
whether they qualify for TRI increases based on the provider type list.
[[page 6]]
6
12. How does DHCS determine provider type in the FFS Delivery System?
In the FFS delivery system, providers enroll in Medi-Cal Fee-for-Service using the
Provider Application and Validation for Enrollment System (PAVE). The PAVE
application requires providers to include provider data including National
Provider Identiﬁer (NPI) and provider type. DHCS’ Provider Enrollment Division
(PED) publishes a list of provider types by business structure on the PAVE website
from which providers may select from. Additionally, when a provider applies for a
NPI through NPPES, they are required to include a taxonomy code (a unique 10-
character code that designates provider classiﬁcation and specialization). CMS
updates the Medicare provider and supplier taxonomy crosswalk semiannually,
which crosswalks taxonomy to a provider/supplier type description.
13. What if my provider type is not listed as eligible for TRI?
For codes identiﬁed as Primary/General Care, all other providers will continue to
be reimbursed at the legacy Medi-Cal rate. For procedure codes identiﬁed as
Obstetric and Non-Specialty Mental Health Services, all providers otherwise
eligible to bill these codes will be reimbursed at the CY 2024 TRI Fee Schedule
rate.
14. Do services (CPT codes) that are carved out of the managed care program
fall under the FFS timeline or the managed care timeline?
If the service is being reimbursed by Medi-Cal FFS then it will be under the FFS
timeline. If the service is being reimbursed in the Managed Care delivery system,
then it will be under the managed care timeline.
15. Who can I contact about my reimbursement amounts?
In the FFS delivery system providers may reach out to CA-MMIS at 1-800-541-
5555 for payment or billing questions. In the Managed Care delivery system
providers may reach out their individual managed care plan for internal
processing timelines and procedures.
[[page 7]]
7
16. What are the exact requirements in Managed Care?
The contractual requirements for Managed Care Plans are detailed in
All Plan
Letter 24-007.
17. How does TRI aﬀect provider reimbursement in a per-service (FFS)
arrangement from a Managed Care Plan?
In instances where the Network Provider is reimbursed on a per service basis, TRI
requirements apply at the procedure code level.
18. How does TRI aﬀect provider reimbursement in non-per service (capitated or
other arrangement) relationship with an MCPs, their Subcontractors, or
Downstream Subcontractors?
In instances where a Network Provider is reimbursed on a capitated basis, MCPs
must ensure the Network Provider receives reimbursement that provides
payment that is at least equal to, or projected to be at least equal to, the CY 2024
TRI Fee Schedule rates for applicable services at minimum. Therefore, MCPs are
not required to adjust payment for capitated subcontracts that are already being
reimbursed at levels at or above the new TRI rates. Examples of non-per service
relationships include, but are not limited to, Health Maintenance Organization
(HMO), capitation and full risk payment, payments with shared savings and
recoupments, performance payments, etc.
For examples of payment requirements for per service and non-per service
relationships see the July 17, 2024 Provider Webinar
slides 23 and 24.
19. How do these reimbursement requirements aﬀect MCPs and providers when
there are multiple layers of contracting such as Independent Practice
Associations?
In accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.5 (Requirements for
Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements) of the MCP Contract and 22 CCR section 53250, each
Network Provider Agreement and Subcontractor Agreement must also comply
[[page 8]]
8
with all applicable State and federal law and contract requirements as well as
DHCS guidance, including all applicable APLs and Policy Letters.
TRI-equivalent payment levels are evaluated at the Network Provider level. The
Network Provider must be paid at a level that meets TRI requirements regardless
of whether the contract is directly with the MCPs, their Subcontractors, or
Downstream Subcontractors.
20. Are Federally Qualiﬁed Health Centers (FQHCs) and Rural Health Clinics
(RHCs), Indian Health Care Providers, or Cost-Based Reimbursement Clinics
(CBRCs) eligible for TRI? Are there any parity requirements?
FQHC, RHC, Indian Health Care Provider, and CBRC services do not qualify for
reimbursement under the TRI Fee Schedule in the FFS delivery system and thus
are not qualifying services for the purposes of this directed payment
arrangement. Pursuant to W&I section 14087.325(d), MCPs are required to
reimburse contracted FQHCs and RHCs in a manner that is no less than the level
and amount of payment that the MCP would make for the same scope of services
if the services were furnished by another Provider type that is not an FQHC or
RHC. MCPs must also comply with the requirements of Provision 3.3.7 of Exhibit
A, Attachment III, of the MCP Contract speciﬁc to non-contracting FQHCs and
RHCs.
21. How should MCPs treat Proposition 56 physician services supplemental
payments until full compliance with APL 24-0007 is achieved?
Until such time that MCPs achieve full compliance with the requirements of APL
24-0007, DHCS anticipates MCPs will ensure that eligible Network Providers
continue to receive the equivalent value of former Proposition 56 physician
services supplemental payments.