[[page 1]]
SOW
Exhibit A
SCOPE OF WORK
Page 1 of 642
I. Service Overview
Contractor agrees to provide to the California Department of Health Care
Services (DHCS) the following services described herein:
Provide health care services to eligible Medi-Cal recipients within the scope of
Medi-Cal benefits as defined in the contents of the Contract.
II. Service Location
The services must be performed at all contracting and participating facilities of
Contractor.
III. Service Hours
The Services must be provided as needed on a 24-hour, seven days a week
basis.
IV. Contract Representatives
A. The Contract representatives during the term of this Contract will be:
Department of Health Care Services
Managed Care Operations Division
Attention: Chief, Procurement &
Contract Development Branch
Telephone: (916) 449-5000
Contractor
Contractor [Enter name]
Attention: [Enter name]
Telephone: (XXX) XXX-XXXX
Fax: (XXX) XXX-XXXX
Email: xxxxxxxx@xxxxxxxx
B. Direct all inquiries to:
Department of Health Care Services
Managed Care Operations Division
Attention: Contracting Officer
1501 Capitol Avenue, Suite 71.4001
P.O. Box Number 997413, Mail Stop
4408
Sacramento, CA 95899-7413
Telephone: (916) 449-5000
Contractor
Attention: [Enter name]
Street address & room number, if
applicable
P.O. Box Number, if applicable
City, State, Zip Code
Telephone: (XXX) XXX-XXXX
Fax: (XXX) XXX-XXXX
Email: xxxxxxxx@xxxxxxxx
2024 Managed Care Boilerplate
Contract
[[page 2]]
SOW
Exhibit A
SCOPE OF WORK
Page 2 of 642
C. Either party may make changes to the information in provision 4 of this
Exhibit A by giving written notice to the other party. Said changes must not
require an amendment to this Contract.
V. Americans with Disabilities Act
Contractor agrees to ensure that deliverables developed and produced, pursuant
to this Agreement must comply with the accessibility requirements of Section 508
of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code (USC) section 794d)
and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) (42 USC sections 12101,
et seq.), as amended, and regulations implementing those statutes as set forth in
36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) part 1194 and 28 CFR part 36, as
applicable. In 1998, Congress amended the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 to require
Federal agencies to make their electronic and information technology (EIT)
accessible to people with disabilities. California Government Code section 7405
codifies section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act (29 USC section 794d) and the
regulations implementing the Rehabilitation Act at 36 CFR part 1194, requiring
accessibility of EIT.
The provision of the services is subject to the provisions set forth in the Exhibits
and Attachments appended hereto.
[[page 3]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 3 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT I
1.0 Definitions
As used in this Contract, unless otherwise expressly provided the following definitions of
terms governs the construction of this Contract:
Abuse means practices that are inconsistent with sound fiscal and business practices
or medical standards, and result in an unnecessary cost to the Medi-Cal program, or in
reimbursement for services that are not Medically Necessary or that fail to meet
professionally recognized standards for health care. It also includes Member practices
that result in unnecessary cost to the Medi-Cal program.
Admission, Discharge, and Transfer (ADT) Feed means a standardized data feed,
updated consistently in real-time sourced from a health facility, such as a hospital, that
includes Members' demographic and healthcare Encounter Data at time of admission,
discharge, and/or transfer from the facility. Demographic information within the feed
must meet requirements of the most recent version of the California Data Exchange
Framework’s Technical Requirements for Exchange Policy and Procedure and conform
to United States Core Data for Interoperability (USCDI) requirements of the California
Data Exchange Framework.
Administrative Cost means only those cost that arise out of Contractor’s operations as
specified in 28 California Code of Regulations (CCR) section 1300.78.
Administrative Subcontractor means a Subcontractor that contractually assumes
administrative obligations of Contractor under the Contract. Administrative obligations
include functions such as Credentialing verification or claims processing. However,
functions related to coordinating or directly delivering health care services to Members,
such as Care Coordination are not administrative functions.
Adult Day Health Care (ADHC) means an organized day program of therapeutic,
social and health activities, and services provided to persons 55 years or older or other
adults with functional impairments, either physical or mental, for the purpose of restoring
or maintaining optimal capacity for self-care as set forth in 22 CCR section 78007.
Advance Directive means a written instruction, such as a living will or durable power of
attorney for health care, recognized under California law, whether statutory or as
recognized by the California courts, relating to the provision of health care when a
Member is incapacitated.
Adverse Benefit Determination (ABD) means any of the following actions taken by
Contractor:
A. The denial or limited authorization of a requested service, including
determinations based on the type or level of a Covered Service, Medical
Necessity;
[[page 4]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 4 of 642
B. The reduction, suspension, or termination of a previously authorized Covered
Service;
C. The denial, in whole or in part, of payment for a Covered Service. A denial, in
whole or in part, of a payment for a service solely because the claim does not
meet the definition of Clean Claim is not an ABD;
D. The failure to provide Covered Services in a timely manner;
E. The failure to act within the required timeframes for standard resolution of
Grievances and Appeals;
F. The denial of the Member’s request to obtain services out-of-Network when a
Member is in an area with only one Medi-Cal managed care health plan; or
G. The denial of a Member’s request to dispute financial liability.
Affiliate means an entity or an individual that directly or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries’ controls, or is controlled by, or is under control of Contractor and that
provides services to or receives services from Contractor.
All Plan Letter (APL) or Policy Letter (PL) means a binding document that has been
dated, numbered, and issued by Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) that
provides clarification of Contractor’s contractual obligations, implementation instructions
for Contractor’s contractual obligations due to changes in State and federal law or
judicial decisions, and/or guidance with regulatory force and effect when DHCS
interprets, implements, or makes specific relevant State statutes under its authority.
Allied Health Personnel means specially trained, licensed, or credentialed health
workers other than physicians, podiatrists and nurses.
Alternative Format Selection (AFS) means the choice a Member or a Member’s
Authorized Representative (AR) makes to receive information and materials in an
alternate format, such as braille, large font, and electronic media, including audio or
data compact discs.
American Indian means a Member who meets the criteria for an “Indian” under 42
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.14(a).
Appeal means a review by Contractor of an Adverse Benefit Determination (ABD)
which includes one of the following actions:
A. A denial or limited authorization of a requested service, including determinations
based on the type or level of service, requirements for Medical Necessity,
appropriateness, setting, or effectiveness of a Covered Service;
[[page 5]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 5 of 642
B. A reduction, suspension, or termination of a previously authorized service;
C. The denial, in whole or in part, of payment for a Covered Service, except
payment denials based solely because the claim does not meet the definition of a
Clean Claim;
D. Failure to provide services in a timely manner; or
E. Failure to act within the timeframes provided in 42 CFR section 438.408(b).
Application Programming Interface (API) means a way for two or more computer
programs to communicate with each other. The calls that make up the API are also
known as subroutines, methods, requests, or endpoints.
Asthma Preventive Services (APS) is defined as a service that provides information
about the basic facts of asthma, proper use of long-term controllers and quick relief
medications, evidence-based self-management techniques and self-monitoring skills,
and actions to mitigate or control environmental exposures that exacerbate asthma
symptoms. Asthma Preventive Services includes evidence-based asthma self-
management education and in-home environmental trigger assessments, consistent
with the National Institutes of Health’s Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of
Asthma.
Authorized Representative (AR) means any individual appointed in writing by a
competent Member or Potential Member, to act in place or on behalf of the Member or
Potential Member for purposes of assisting or representing the Member or Potential
Member with Grievances and Appeals, State Hearings, Independent Medical Reviews,
and in any other capacity, as specified by the Member or Potential Member.
Auxiliary Aid means "auxiliary aids and services" as defined in 28 CFR section
36.303(b) that assist disabled Members to communicate, receive and understand
information.
Basic Population Health Management (Basic PHM) means an approach to care that
ensures that needed programs and services are made available to each Member,
regardless of the Member’s Risk Tier, at the right time and in the right setting. Basic
PHM includes federal requirements for Care Coordination.
Behavioral Health means mental health conditions and Substance Use Disorders
(SUD).
Behavioral Health Services means Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS), Non-
specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS), and Substance Use Disorders (SUD)
treatment.
[[page 6]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 6 of 642
Behavioral Health Treatment (BHT) means services and treatment programs for the
treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), as specified in the California Medicaid
State Plan, including applied behavioral analysis and other evidence-based intervention
programs that develop or restore, to the maximum extent practicable, the functioning of
a Member less than 21 years of age who has been diagnosed with ASD, or for whom a
licensed physician, surgeon, or psychologist has determined BHT is Medically
Necessary.
BHT Provider means a Qualified Autism Services (QAS) Provider, QAS Professional,
or QAS Paraprofessional.
Beneficiary Identification Card means a plastic card issued by DHCS to a Member
confirming Medi-Cal eligibility.
Bright Futures Periodicity Schedule means the Bright Futures/American Academy of
Pediatrics Recommendations for Preventive Pediatric Health Care and guidelines
published by the American Academy of Pediatrics and Bright Futures, in accordance
with which all Members less than 21 years of age must receive well child assessments,
screenings, and services.
California Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) Terms and Conditions
means those terms and conditions issued and approved by the federal Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), including any attachments, appendices, or
similar documents, and subsequent amendments thereto, that govern implementation of
the respective components of the CalAIM initiative pursuant to Article 5.1 of Chapter 7
of Part 3 of Division 9 of Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I). CalAIM Terms and
Conditions must include, at a minimum, any terms and conditions specified in the
following:
A. CalAIM Demonstration, Number 11-W-00193/9, as approved by CMS pursuant to
42 United States Code (USC) section 1315, including for any applicable
extension period, or for any period otherwise specified in the CalAIM Terms and
Conditions.
B. Any associated Medicaid waivers as approved by CMS pursuant to 42 USC
section 1396n, including but not limited to the CalAIM Section 1915(b) Waiver
Control Number CA 17.R10, that are necessary to implement a CalAIM
component, including for any applicable extension period, or for any period
otherwise specified in the CalAIM Terms and Conditions.
California Children’s Services (CCS)-Eligible Condition means a medical condition
that qualifies a Child to receive medical services under the CCS Program, as specified
in 22 CCR section 41515.1 et seq.
California Children Services (CCS) Provider means any of the following Providers
when used to treat Members for a CCS-Eligible Condition:
[[page 7]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 7 of 642
A. A medical Provider that is paneled by the CCS Program, pursuant to Health and
Safety Code (H&S), Article 5 (commencing with section 123800) of Chapter 3 of
Part 2 of Division 106.
B. A licensed acute care hospital approved by the CCS Program.
C. A special care center approved by the CCS Program.
CCS Case Manager means an individual identified as a single point-of-contact
responsible for the provision of case management services and facilitation of Care
Coordination for a Member receiving services under the California Children’s Services
(CCS) Program.
CCS Liaison means primary points of contact for the coordination of services between
Contractor and county CCS Program who ensure the appropriate communication and
care coordination are ongoing between the Contractor and county CCS Program,
facilitate quarterly meetings, and provide updates to the county CCS Program as
appropriate.
CCS Program means a State program administered as a partnership between the
county health department and the DHCS to provide Medically Necessary services to
treat California Children’s Services (CCS)-Eligible Conditions.
Capitation Payment means a regularly scheduled payment made by DHCS to
Contractor on behalf of each Member for each month the Member is enrolled with
Contractor that is based on the actuarially sound capitation rate for the provision of
Covered Services and paid regardless of whether a Member receives services during
the period covered by the payment.
Care Coordination means Contractor’s coordination of care delivery and services for
Members, either within or- across delivery systems including:
A. Services the Member receives by Contractor;
B. Services the Member receives from any other managed care health plan;
C. Services the Member receives in Fee-For-Service (FFS);
D. Services the Member receives from out-of-Network Providers;
E. Services that the Member receives through carve-out programs, such as
pharmacy, Substance Use Disorder (SUD), mental health, and dental services;
and
F. Services the Member receives from community and social support Providers.
[[page 8]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 8 of 642
Care Management Plan (CMP) means a written plan that is developed with input from
the Member and/or their family member(s), parent, legal guardian, Authorized
Representative (AR), caregiver, and/or other authorized support person(s) as
appropriate to assess strengths, risks, needs, goals, and preferences, and make
recommendations for clinical and non-clinical service needs.
Center of Excellence means a designation assigned to a transplant program by DHCS
upon confirmation that the transplant program meets DHCS’ criteria.
Certified Nurse Midwife (CNM) means a registered nurse who has successfully
completed a program of study and clinical experience meeting the State guidelines or
has been certified by an organization recognized by the State.
Child/Children and Youth, regardless of whether the term is capitalized or not, means
a Member/Members less than 21 years of age unless otherwise specified.
Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs (CYSHCN) means Children and
Youth who have or are at increased risk for chronic physical, developmental, behavioral,
or emotional condition and who also require health or related services of a type or
amount beyond that required by Children and Youth generally. The identification,
assessment, treatment, and coordination of care for CYSHCN must comply with the
requirements of 42 CFR sections 438.208(b)(3), 438.208(b)(4), and 438.208(c)(2) – (4).
Clean Claim means a claim that can be processed without obtaining additional
information from the Provider or from a third party, including bills, or invoices that meet
DHCS established billing and invoicing requirements.
Cold-Call Marketing means Contractor’s or its agent’s unsolicited personal contact with
a Member or a Potential Member for the purpose of Marketing.
Community Based Adult Services (CBAS) means skilled nursing, social services,
therapies, personal care, family/caregiver training and support, nutrition services,
transportation, and other services provided in an outpatient, facility-based program, as
set forth in the CalAIM Terms and Conditions, or as set forth in any subsequent
demonstration amendment or renewal, or successive demonstration, waiver, or other
Medicaid authority governing the provision of CBAS services.
CBAS Discharge Plan of Care means a discharge plan of care based on the
Member’s Community Based Adult Services (CBAS) assessment that is prepared by
the CBAS Provider pursuant to 22 CCR section 78345 before the date of the Member's
first reassessment and reviewed and updated at the time of each reassessment and
prior to discharge.
CBAS Emergency Remote Services (ERS) means the following services, provided in
alternative Service Locations such as a community setting or the Member’s home,
[[page 9]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 9 of 642
and/or as appropriate, via Telehealth or live virtual video conferencing, as clinically
appropriate: professional nursing care, personal care services, social services,
Behavioral Health Services, speech therapy, therapeutic activities, registered dietician-
nutrition counseling, physical therapy, occupational therapy, and meals.
CBAS Individual Plan of Care (IPC) means a written plan of care developed by a
Community Based Adult Services (CBAS) center's multidisciplinary team, as specified in
the CalAIM Terms and Conditions, or as specified in any subsequent demonstration
amendment or renewal, or successive demonstration, waiver, or other Medicaid
authority governing the provision of CBAS.
CBAS Provider means an Adult Day Health Care (ADHC) center that is licensed by the
California Department of Public Health (CDPH) to provide ADHC services, is enrolled as
a Medi-Cal Provider, and has been certified as a Community Based Adult Services
(CBAS) Provider by the California Department of Aging.
Community Health Assessment (CHA) means a systematic examination of the health
status indicators for a given population that is used to identify key problems and assets
in a community. Public health departments such as State, local, territorial, or Tribal
develop CHAs to meet voluntary Public Health Accreditation Board (PHAB) standards
and State Future of Public Health funding requirements. A variety of tools and
processes may be used to conduct these population-level assessments. The essential
feature, as defined by the PHAB, is that the assessment is developed through a
participatory, collaborative process with various key sectors of the community.
Community Health Improvement Plan (CHIP) means the output of the CHA when
produced by public health departments (local, territorial, State, or Tribal) for Public
Health Accreditation Board (PHAB) accreditation, State Local Assistance Spending Plan
funding allocation, and non-profit hospitals to meet federal and State requirements.
Community Health Worker (CHW) means an individual known by a variety of job titles,
such as promotores, community health representatives, navigators, and other non-
licensed public health workers, including violence prevention professionals, and as set
forth in APL 22-016.
Community Reinvestment Plan means a document outlining the reinvestment
activities in local communities.
Community Supports means substitute services or settings to those required under
the California Medicaid State Plan that Contractor may select and offer to their
Members pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.3(e)(2) when the substitute service or setting
is medically appropriate and more cost-effective than the service or setting listed in the
California Medicaid State Plan.
Community Supports Provider means entities that Contractor has determined can
provide the Community Supports to eligible Members in an effective manner consistent
[[page 10]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 10 of 642
with culturally and linguistically appropriate care, as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.11 (Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees).
Complex Care Management (CCM) means an approach to care management that
meets differing needs of high and rising-risk Members, including both longer-term
chronic Care Coordination for chronic conditions and interventions for episodic,
temporary needs. Contractors must provide CCM in accordance with all National
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) CCM requirements.
CCM Care Manager means an individual identified as a single point-of-contact
responsible for the provision of Complex Care Management (CCM) services for a
Member.
Confidential Information means facts, documents, or records in any form that are
recognized as "confidential" by any law, regulation, or contract.
Contract means this written agreement between DHCS and Contractor.
Contract Revenues means the amount of Medi-Cal managed health care Capitation
Payments, Supplemental Payments, additional payments, and other revenue paid to
Contractor by DHCS under this Contract.
Contractor’s Representative means an individual appointed by Contractor who is
responsible for implementing this Contract, receiving notices on this Contract, and
taking actions and making representations related to the compliance with this Contract.
Correctional Facility means State prisons, county jails, and youth correctional
facilities.
Corrective Actions means specific identifiable activities or undertakings of Contractor
which address Contract deficiencies or noncompliance.
Cost Avoid or Cost Avoidance means the practice of requiring Providers to bill liable
third parties prior to seeking payment from the Medi-Cal program.
County Social Services Department means a county agency responsible for
determining the initial and continued eligibility of an individual for participation in the
Medi-Cal program or for providing services as specified in this Contract.
Covered Services means those health care services, set forth in W&I sections 14000
et seq. and 14131 et seq., 22 CCR section 51301 et seq., 17 CCR section 6800 et seq.,
the Medi-Cal Provider Manual, the California Medicaid State Plan, the California Section
1115 Medicaid Demonstration Project, this Contract, and APLs that are made the
responsibility of Contractor pursuant to the California Section 1915(b) Medicaid Waiver
authorizing the Medi-Cal managed care program or other federally approved managed
care authorities maintained by DHCS.
[[page 11]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 11 of 642
Covered Services do not include:
A. Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) program as specified in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsections 4.3.15 (Services for Persons with Developmental
Disabilities), 4.3.20 (Home and Community-Based Services Programs) regarding
waiver programs, 4.3.21 (In-Home Supportive Services), and Department of
Developmental Services (DDS) Administered Medicaid Home and Community-
Based Services Waiver. HCBS programs do not include services that are
available as an Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT)
service, as described in 22 CCR sections 51184, 51340 and 51340.1. EPSDT
services are covered under this Contract, as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 4.3.11.F.4 (Targeted Case Management Services), regarding
services for Members less than 21 years of age. Contractor is financially
responsible for the payment of all EPSDT services;
B. California Children’s Services (CCS) as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.3.14 (California Children’s Services), except for Contractors
providing Whole Child Model (WCM) services;
C. Specialty Mental Health Services as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.3.12 (Mental Health Services);
D. Alcohol and SUD treatment services, and outpatient heroin and other opioid
detoxification, except for medications for addiction treatment as specified in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.13 (Alcohol and Substance Use
Disorder Treatment Services);
E. Fabrication of optical lenses except as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.3.7 (Services for All Members);
F. Direct Observed Therapy for Treatment of Tuberculosis as specified in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.18 (Direct Observed Therapy for Treatment of
Tuberculosis);
G. Dental services as specified in W&I sections 14131.10, 14132(h), 14132.22,
14132.23, and 14132.88, and EPSDT dental services as described in 22 CCR
section 51340.1(b). However, Contractor is responsible for all Covered Services
as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.17 (Dental) regarding
dental services;
H. Prayer or spiritual healing as specified in 22 CCR section 51312;
I. Educationally Necessary Behavioral Health Services that are covered by a Local
Education Agency (LEA) and provided pursuant to a Member’s Individualized
Education Plan (IEP) as set forth in Education Code section 56340 et seq.,
[[page 12]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 12 of 642
Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) as set forth in Government Code (GC)
section 95020, or Individualized Health and Support Plan (IHSP). However,
Contractor is responsible for all Medically Necessary Behavioral Health Services
as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III Subsection 4.3.16 (School-Based
Services);
J. Laboratory services provided under the State serum alpha-feto-protein-testing
program administered by the Genetic Disease Branch of California Department
of Public Health (CDPH);
K. Pediatric Day Health Care, except for Contractors providing Whole Child Model
(WCM) services;
L. State Supported Services;
M. Targeted Case Management (TCM) services as set forth in 42 USC section
1396n(g), W&I sections 14132.48 and 14021.3, 22 CCR sections 51185 and
51351, and as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.11
(Targeted Case Management Services). However, if Members less than 21 years
of age are not eligible for or accepted by a Regional Center (RC) or a local
government health program for TCM services, Contractor must ensure access to
comparable services under the EPSDT benefit in accordance with APL 23-005;
N. Childhood lead poisoning case management provided by county or State health
departments;
O. Non-medical services provided by Regional Centers (RC) to individuals with
Developmental Disabilities, including but not limited to respite, out-of-home
placement, and supportive living;
P. End of life services as stated in Health and Safety Code (H&S) section 443 et
seq., and APL 16-006; and
Q. Prescribed and covered outpatient drugs, medical supplies, and enteral
nutritional products when appropriately billed by a pharmacy on a pharmacy
claim, in accordance with APL 22-012.
Credentialing means the process of determining a Provider or an entity’s professional
or technical competence, and may include registration, certification, licensure, and
professional association membership.
Deemed Exhaustion means Contractor’s failure to adhere to the notice and timing
requirements in responding to a Member’s Appeal of an Adverse Benefit Determination
(ABD), which allows a Member to immediately request a State Hearing.
[[page 13]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 13 of 642
Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) or Department means the single State
department responsible for the administration of the Medi-Cal Program, California
Children’s Services (CCS), Genetically Handicapped Persons Program (GHPP), and
other health-related programs, as provided by statute and/or regulation.
DHCS Comprehensive Quality Strategy means the federally required written strategy
produced by the State, pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.340 that assesses and
improves the quality of health care and services furnished by Medi-Cal managed care
health plans.
DHCS Contract Manager or DHCS Program Contract Manager means the
designated DHCS employee who is the primary contact within DHCS for this Contract,
and responsible for receiving and sending notices and other documents from/to
Contractor relating to this Contract.
DHCS Contracting Officer means the DHCS individual authorized to act on behalf of
DHCS to make decisions and direct appropriate actions under this Contract.
Department of Managed Health Care (DMHC) means the California department
responsible for administering the Knox-Keene Health Care Service Plan Act of 1975.
Developmental Disability (DD) means, as defined by the Lanterman Developmental
Disabilities Services Act (1977) at W&I section 4512(a)(1), a disability that originates
before an individual attains 18 years of age, continues, or can be expected to continue,
indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. This term includes
intellectual disability, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term also includes
disabling conditions found to be closely related to intellectual disability, but does not
include other handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
Director means the Director of DHCS.
Directed Payment Initiative means a payment arrangement that directs certain
expenditures made by Contractor under this Contract and that is either approved by
CMS as described in 42 CFR section 438.6(c) or established pursuant to 42 CFR
sections 438.6(c)(1)(iii)(A) and 438.6(c)(2)(ii) and documented in a rate certification
approved by CMS.
Discharge Planning means planning that begins at the time of admission to a hospital
or facility to ensure that necessary care, services, and supports are in place in the
community before a Member leaves the hospital or facility in order to reduce
readmission rates, improve Member and family preparation, enhance Member
satisfaction, assure post-discharge follow-up, increase medication safety, and support
safe transitions.
Discrimination Grievance means any complaint or grievance alleging discrimination
prohibited by State non-discrimination law, including, without limitation, the Unruh Civil
[[page 14]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 14 of 642
Rights Act and GC section 11135, and federal non-discrimination law, including, without
limitation, Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964; Title IX of the Education Amendments
of 1972; the Age Discrimination Act of 1975; Sections 504 and 508 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (29 USC sections 794 and 794d), as amended; Titles II and III of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended; and Section 1557 of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (42 USC section 18116).
Doula means a birth worker who provides health education, advocacy, and physical,
emotional, and nonmedical support for pregnant and postpartum persons before,
during, and after childbirth, otherwise known as the perinatal period, for up to one year
after pregnancy and provides support during miscarriage, stillbirth, and abortion
(pregnancy termination) as set forth in APL 23-024.
Downstream Subcontractor means an individual or an entity that has a Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement with a Subcontractor or a Downstream Subcontractor. A
Network Provider is not a Downstream Subcontractor solely because it enters into a
Network Provider Agreement.
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor means a Downstream Subcontractor
that contractually assumes all duties and obligations of Contractor under the Contract,
through the Subcontractor, except for those contractual duties and obligations where
delegation is legally or contractually prohibited. A managed care plan can operate as a
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor.
Downstream Partially Delegated Subcontractor means a Downstream Subcontractor
that contractually assumes some, but not all, duties and obligations of a Subcontractor
under the Contract, including, for example, obligations regarding specific Member
populations or obligations regarding a specific set of services. Individual physician
associations and medical groups often operate as Downstream Partially Delegated
Subcontractors.
Downstream Administrative Subcontractor means a Downstream Subcontractor that
contractually assumes administrative obligations of a Subcontractor under the Contract.
Administrative obligations include functions such as credentialing verification or claims
processing. However, functions related to coordinating or directly delivering health care
services for Members, such as Utilization Management (UM) or Care Coordination, are
not administrative functions.
Downstream Subcontractor Agreement means a written agreement between a
Subcontractor and a Downstream Subcontractor or between any Downstream
Subcontractors. The Downstream Subcontractor Agreement must include a delegation
of Contractor’s and Subcontractor’s duties and obligations under the Contract.
Drug Medi-Cal (DMC) means the State system wherein Members receive Covered
Services from DMC-certified Substance Use Disorder (SUD) treatment Providers.
[[page 15]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 15 of 642
Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System (DMC-ODS) means a program for the
organized delivery of Substance Use Disorder (SUD) services to Medi-Cal-eligible
individuals with SUD residing in a county that has elected to participate in the DMC-
ODS. Critical elements of DMC-ODS include providing a continuum of care modeled
after the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) Criteria® for SUD treatment
services, increased local control and accountability, greater administrative oversight,
creation of utilization controls to improve care and efficient use of resources, evidence-
based practices in substance use treatment, and increased coordination with other
systems of care.
Durable Medical Equipment (DME) means Medically Necessary medical equipment
as defined by 22 CCR section 51160 that a Provider prescribes for a Member that the
Member uses in the home, in the community, or in a facility that is used as a home.
Dyadic Care means to serve both parent(s) or caregiver(s) and Child together as a
dyad and is a form of treatment that targets family well-being as a mechanism to
support healthy Child development and mental health. It is provided within pediatric
Primary Care settings whenever possible and can help identify Behavioral Health
interventions and other Behavioral Health issues, provide referrals to services, and help
guide the parent-Child or caregiver-Child relationship. Dyadic Care fosters team-based
approaches to meeting family needs, including addressing mental health and social
support concerns, and it broadens and improves the delivery of pediatric Preventive
Care.
Dyadic Service means a family and caregiver-focused Model of Care intended to
address developmental and Behavioral Health conditions of Children as soon as they
are identified. Dyadic Services include Dyadic Behavioral Health (DBH) well-Child visits,
Dyadic Comprehensive Community Supports Services, Dyadic Psychoeducational
Services, and Dyadic Family Training and Counseling for Child Development.
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) means the
provision of Medically Necessary comprehensive and preventive health care services
provided to Members less than 21 years of age in accordance with requirements in 42
USC sections 1396a(a)(43) and 1396d(a)(4)(B) and (r), 42 CFR section 441.50 et seq.,
and as required by W&I sections 14059.5(b) and 14132(v). Such services may also be
Medically Necessary to correct or ameliorate defects and physical or Behavioral Health
conditions.
Emergency Medical Condition means a medical condition manifesting itself by acute
symptoms of sufficient severity, including severe pain, that a prudent layperson, who
possesses an average knowledge of health and medicine, could reasonably expect the
absence of immediate medical attention to result in one or more of the following:
A. Placing the Member’s health in serious jeopardy;
B. Serious impairment to bodily functions;
[[page 16]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 16 of 642
C. Serious dysfunction to any bodily organ or part; or
D. Death.
Emergency Medical Transportation (EMT) means transportation services for an
Emergency Medical Condition and includes emergency air transportation.
Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan means the plan identified and
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 6.1 (General Requirements).
Emergency Services means inpatient and outpatient Covered Services that are
furnished by a qualified Provider and needed to evaluate or stabilize an Emergency
Medical Condition, as defined in 42 CFR section 438.114 and H&S section
1317.1(a)(1).
Encounter means an instance of direct Provider-to-Member interaction, regardless of
the setting, where the Provider is diagnosing, evaluating, or treating the Member’s
condition.
Encounter Data means the information that describes health care interactions between
Members and Providers relating to the receipt of any item(s) or service(s) by a Member
under this Contract and subject to the standards of 42 CFR sections 438.242 and
438.818.
Enhanced Care Management (ECM) means a whole-person, interdisciplinary
approach to care that addresses the clinical and non-clinical needs of high-cost and/or
high-need Members who meet ECM Populations of Focus eligibility criteria through a
systematic coordination of services and comprehensive care management that is
community-based, interdisciplinary, high-touch, and person-centered.
ECM Lead Care Manager means a Member’s designated Enhanced Care
Management (ECM) care manager who works for the ECM Provider organization or as
staff of Contractor, and is responsible for coordinating all aspects of ECM and any
Community Supports as a part of the Member’s multi-disciplinary care team, which may
include other care managers.
ECM Populations of Focus/Populations of Focus means the populations identified in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.2 (Populations of Focus for Enhanced Care
Management).
ECM Provider means community-based entities with experience and expertise
providing intensive, in-person care management services to Members in one or more of
the Populations of Focus for Enhanced Care Management (ECM).
[[page 17]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 17 of 642
Enrollment means the process by which a Potential Member becomes a Member of
Contractor.
Excluded Entities or Excluded Providers means entities, Providers, and individuals
that are excluded from participation in federally funded health care programs for a
variety of reasons, including a conviction for Medicare or Medicaid Fraud.
Excluded Service means a service that is covered by the Medi-Cal program but is not
a Covered Service, and is carved out of this Contract for the provision of Covered
Services.
External Quality Review (EQR) means the analysis and review by the External Quality
Review Organization (EQRO) of aggregated information on quality, timeliness, and
access to the health care services that Contractor, its Subcontractor, its Downstream
Subcontractor, or its Network Provider furnishes to Members.
External Quality Review Organization (EQRO) means an organization that meets the
competence and independence requirements set forth in 42 CFR section 438.354, and
performs EQR and other EQR-related activities as set forth in 42 CFR section 438.358
pursuant to its contract with DHCS.
Family Therapy means a type of psychotherapy covered under the Medi-Cal Non-
specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS) benefit and is composed of at least two
family members. Family therapy sessions address family dynamics as they relate to
mental status and behavior(s) and is focused on improving relationships and behaviors
in the family and between family members, such as between a Child and parent(s) or
caregiver(s).
Federal Financial Participation (FFP) means federal expenditures provided to
reimburse allowable State expenditures made under the approved California Medicaid
State Plan, waivers, or other similar federal Medicaid authority.
Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) means an entity defined in 42 USC section
1396d(l)(2)(B).
Federally Qualified Health Maintenance Organization (FQHMO) means a prepaid
health delivery plan that has fulfilled the requirements of the Health Maintenance
Organization Act, along with its amendments and regulations, and has obtained the
federal government's qualification status under 42 USC section 300e.
Fee-For-Service (FFS) means the Medi-Cal delivery system in which Providers submit
claims to and receive payments from DHCS for Medi-Cal Covered Services rendered to
Medi-Cal recipients.
[[page 18]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 18 of 642
File and Use means a submission to DHCS that does not need review and approval
prior to use or implementation, but for which DHCS can require edits on or after
implementation.
Financial Performance Guarantee means cash or cash equivalents which are
immediately redeemable upon demand by DHCS, in an amount determined by DHCS,
which must not be less than one full month’s Contract Revenues.
Financial Statements means reports prepared by Contractor to present its financial
performance and position at a point in time, and include a balance sheet, income
statement, statement of cash flows, statement of equity and accompanying footnotes
prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).
Fiscal Year (FY) means any 12-month period for which annual accounts are kept. The
State Fiscal Year (SFY) is July 1 through June 30; the federal Fiscal Year (FY) is
October 1 through September 30.
Fraud means an intentional deception or misrepresentation made by persons with the
knowledge that the deception could result in some unauthorized benefit to themselves
or some other person and includes any act that constitutes Fraud under applicable
federal or State law, including 42 CFR section 455.2 and W&I section 14043.1(i).
Freestanding Birthing Center (FBC) means a health facility that is not a hospital,
where childbirth is planned to occur away from the pregnant woman’s residence, and
that is licensed or otherwise approved by the State to provide prenatal labor and
delivery or postpartum care and other ambulatory services that are in their scope of
work as defined in 42 USC section 1396d(I)(3)(B).
Fully Delegated Subcontractor means a Subcontractor that contractually assumes all
duties and obligations of Contractor under the Contract, except for those contractual
duties and obligations where delegation is legally or contractually prohibited. A
managed care plan can operate as a Fully Delegated Subcontractor.
Governing Board means Contractor’s board of directors or a similar body, and/or its
executive management, that has the authority to manage and direct Contractor’s affairs
and activities, including, but not limited to, approving initiatives and establishing
Contractor's policies and procedures.
Grievance means any expression of dissatisfaction about any matter other than an
Adverse Benefit Determination (ABD), and may include, but is not limited to: the Quality
of Care or services provided, aspects of interpersonal relationships with a Provider or
Contractor’s employee, failure to respect a Member’s rights regardless of whether
remedial action is requested, and the right to dispute an extension of time proposed by
Contractor to make an authorization decision. A complaint is the same as Grievance. An
inquiry is a request for more information that does not include an expression of
dissatisfaction. Inquiries may include, but are not limited to, questions pertaining to
[[page 19]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 19 of 642
eligibility, benefits, or other Contractor processes. If contractor is unable to distinguish
between a grievance and an inquiry, it must be considered a grievance.
Health Disparity means differences in health, including mental health, and outcomes
closely linked with social, economic, and environmental disadvantage, which are often
driven by the social conditions in which individuals live, learn, work, and play.
Characteristics such as race, ethnicity, age, disability, sexual orientation, gender
identity, socio-economic status, geographic location, and other factors historically linked
to exclusion or discrimination are known to influence the health of individuals, families,
and communities.
Health Equity means the reduction or elimination of Health Disparities, Health
Inequities, or other disparities in health that adversely affect vulnerable populations.
Health Inequity means a systematic difference in the health status of different
population groups arising from the social conditions in which Members are born, grow,
live, work, and/or age, resulting in significant social and economic costs both to
individuals and societies.
Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS®) means the set of
standardized performance measures sponsored and maintained by the National
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA).
Implementation Period means the period of time in which Contractor is undertaking
any readiness requirements required by DHCS before performance of the Contract
begins. The Implementation Period begins with DHCS awarding this Contract and
extends to the effective date that begins the Operations Period.
Incentive Arrangement means any payment mechanism approved by Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) in accordance with the requirements of 42 CFR
section 438.6(b) under which Contractor may receive incentive payments in addition to
Capitation Payments for meeting targets specified in accordance with this Contract,
including but not limited to Exhibit B, Subsection 1.1.14.D (Special Contract Provisions
Related to Payment).
Independent Medical Review (IMR) means a review of Contractor’s denial of a
Member’s request for health care service as not Medically Necessary, experimental, or
investigational by an independent physician(s) who is contracted with DMHC. The IMR
decision is binding on Contractor but not the Member who may still request a State
Hearing after an IMR pursuant to H&S section 1374.30 and 28 CCR section
1300.74.30.
Indian Health Care Provider (IHCP) means a health care program operated by the
Indian Health Service (IHS) or by an Indian Tribe, Tribal Organization, or Urban Indian
Organization (otherwise known as an I/T/U) as those terms are defined in section 4 of
the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (IHCIA) at 25 USC section 1603.
[[page 20]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 20 of 642
Indian Health Service (IHS) means an agency within the United States Department of
Health and Human Services responsible for providing federal health services to
American Indians and Alaska Natives. The IHS is the principal federal health care
provider and health advocate for these populations and provides them with a
comprehensive Indian health care delivery system.
Indian Health Services Memorandum of Agreement Provider (IHS/MOA) means an
Indian Health Service (IHS) program funded under the authority of Public Law 93-638 at
25 USC section 5301 et seq. These programs have elected to participate in Medi-Cal as
IHS/MOA providers. IHS/MOAs are subject to the payment terms of APL 17-020. The
list of eligible IHS/MOA providers is found in APL 17-020, Attachment #1. These
providers receive a federally established All-Inclusive Rate that is updated annually by
the federal Office of Management and Budgets and published in APL 17-020,
Attachment #2.
In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) means services provided to Members by a
county in accordance with the requirements set forth in W&I sections 12300 et seq.,
14132.95, 14132.952, and 14132.956.
Initial Health Appointment (IHA), previously called Initial Health Assessment, means
an assessment that must be completed within 120 days of Contractor enrollment for
new Members and must include a history of the Member’s physical and Behavioral
Health, an identification of risks, an assessment of need for preventive screens or
services and health education, and a diagnosis and plan for treatment of any diseases.
Incurred but Not Reported (IBNR) Claim Estimate means a financial accounting of all
services that have been performed, but have not been invoiced or recorded, or
estimates of costs for medical services provided for which a claim has not yet been
filed.
Intermediate Care Facility (ICF) means a residential facility certified and licensed by
the State to provide medical services at a lower level of care than is provided at Skilled
Nursing Facilities (SNFs), and meets the standards specified in 22 CCR section 51212.
An Intermediate Care Facility for the Developmentally Disabled (ICF/DD) includes the
following types:
A. ICF/DD-Habilitative as defined in Health and Safety Code (H&S) section 1250(e);
B. ICF/DD-Nursing as defined in H&S section 1250(h); and
C. ICF/DD as defined in H&S section 1250(g) and does not include the ICF/DD-
Continuous Nursing Care Program.
Joint Commission (JC) means the organization that provides health care accreditation
and related services that support performance improvement in health care organization
[[page 21]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 21 of 642
and is composed of representatives of the American Hospital Association, the American
Medical Association, the American College of Physicians, the American College of
Surgeons, and the American Dental Association.
Justice Involved (JI) Individuals means individuals who are currently incarcerated, or
were formerly incarcerated within the past 12 months.
Knox-Keene Health Care Service Plan Act of 1975 (KKA) means the law that
regulates health care service plans and is administrated by DMHC, commencing with
H&S section 1340 et seq.
Laboratory Testing Site means any laboratory and any Provider site, such as a
Primary Care Provider (PCP) or Specialist office or clinic, that performs tests or
examinations on human biological specimens derived from the human body.
Licensed Midwife (LM) means an individual licensed to practice midwifery and assist a
woman in normal childbirth as defined in California Business and Professions Code
(B&P) section 2507.
Limited English Proficiency (LEP) means an inability or a limited ability to speak,
read, write, or understand the English language at a level that permits the Member to
interact effectively with Providers or Contractor’s employees.
Local Educational Agency (LEA) means a school district, county office of education,
charter school, community college district, California State University campus or
University of California campus.
Local Government Agency (LGA) means a local governmental entity including, but
not limited to, a county Child welfare agency, county probation department, county
Behavioral Health department, county social services department, county public health
department, school district, or county office of education.
Local Health Department (LHD) means a municipal, county, or regional public health
department.
Long-Term Care (LTC) means specialized rehabilitative services and care provided in
a Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF), subacute facility, pediatric subacute facility,
Intermediate Care Facility/Developmentally Disabled (ICF/DD), ICF/DD-Habilitative
(ICF/DD-H), or ICF/DD-Nursing (ICF/DD-N) homes.
Long-Term Services & Supports (LTSS) means services and supports designed to
allow a Member with functional limitations and/or chronic illnesses the ability to live or
work in the setting of the Member’s choice, which may include the Member’s home, a
worksite, a Provider-owned or controlled residential setting, a nursing facility, or other
institutional setting. LTSS includes both Long-Term Care (LTC) and Home and
[[page 22]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 22 of 642
Community-Based Services (HCBS) programs and includes carved-in and carved-out
services.
Marketing means any activity conducted by or on behalf of Contractor where
information regarding the services offered by Contractor is disseminated in order to
persuade or influence Potential Members to enroll. Marketing also includes any similar
activity to secure the endorsement of any individual or organization on behalf of
Contractor.
Marketing Materials means materials produced in any medium, by or on behalf of
Contractor that can be reasonably interpreted as Marketing to Potential Members.
Marketing Materials include, but are not limited to, all printed materials, illustrated
materials, digital materials, videos, and media scripts.
Marketing Representative means a person who is engaged in Marketing activities on
behalf of Contractor.
Medi-Cal Eligibility Data System (MEDS) means the automated eligibility information
processing system operated by DHCS which provides on-line access for Medi-Cal
recipient information and update of Medi-Cal recipient eligibility data.
Medi-Cal FFS Rate means the rate that DHCS pays Providers on a per unit or per
procedure billing code basis.
Medi-Cal Provider Manual means the multi-part document identifying Medi-Cal
benefits and billing codes published and maintained by DHCS at https://files.medi-
cal.ca.gov/pubsdoco/Manuals_menu.aspx.
Medical Home means a model of organization of Primary Care that delivers the core
functions of primary health care, which is comprised of comprehensive care, patient-
centered, coordinated care, accessible services, and quality and safety.
Medical Records means the record of a Member’s medical information, including but
not limited to medical history, care or treatments received, test results, diagnoses, and
prescribed medications.
Medically Necessary or Medical Necessity means reasonable and necessary
services to protect life, to prevent significant illness or significant disability, or alleviate
severe pain through the diagnosis or treatment of disease, illness, or injury, as required
under W&I section 14059.5(a) and 22 CCR section 51303(a). Medically Necessary.
services must include services necessary to achieve age-appropriate growth and
development, and attain, maintain, or regain functional capacity.
For Members less than 21 years of age, a service is Medically Necessary if it meets the
EPSDT standard of Medical Necessity set forth in 42 USC section 1396d(r)(5), as
required by W&I sections 14059.5(b) and 14132(v). Without limitation, Medically
[[page 23]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 23 of 642
Necessary services for Members less than 21 years of age include all services
necessary to achieve or maintain age-appropriate growth and development, attain,
regain or maintain functional capacity, or improve, support, or maintain the Member's
current health condition. Contractor must determine Medical Necessity on a case-by-
case basis, taking into account the individual needs of the Child.
Member or Enrollee means a Potential Member who has enrolled with Contractor.
Member Assignment means the written notification and assignment of a Potential
Member to the Medi-Cal managed care health plan of the Member’s choice, or if as
designated by DHCS when the Potential Member fails to make a timely choice.
Member Handbook or Evidence of Coverage (EOC) means the document that
describes the health care benefits and Covered Services that are available to a
Member.
Member Information means documents that are vital, or critical to obtaining benefits or
services, and includes, but is not limited to: the Member Handbook, Provider Directory,
welcome packets, Marketing information, form letters including Notice of Actions (NOA),
notices related to Grievances or Appeals, including Grievance and Appeal
acknowledgement and resolution letters, Contractor’s preventive health reminders,
Member surveys, notices advising of the availability of free language assistance, and
newsletters.
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) means a formal written agreement between
Contractor and Local Government Agencies, county programs, and third-party entities.
Minimum Performance Level (MPL) refers to Contractor’s minimum performance
requirements for select Quality Performance Measures.
Minor Consent Services means those Covered Services of a sensitive nature which
minors may, without parental or guardian consent, receive. Minor Consent Services
include, but are not limited to the following situations:
Under Age 12
A. Pregnancy and pregnancy related services
B. Family planning services
C. Sexual assault services
Age 12 and Older
D. Pregnancy and pregnancy related services
[[page 24]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 24 of 642
E. Family planning services
F. Sexual assault services
G. Infectious, contagious, or communicable disease diagnosis and treatment
H. Sexually transmitted diseases (or infections) prevention, diagnosis and treatment
I. Drug and alcohol abuse treatment and counseling
J. Outpatient mental health treatment and counseling
1) Minors may obtain outpatient mental health services, if the opinion of the
attending professional person determines that the minor is mature enough
to participate intelligently in their health care pursuant to Family Code
section 6924.
K. Intimate partner violence services.
Model of Care (MOC) means Contractor’s approach for providing Enhanced Care
Management (ECM) and Community Supports, including its Policies and Procedures for
partnering with ECM and Community Supports Providers.
National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) is an organization responsible for
the accreditation of managed care plans and other health care entities and for
developing and managing health care measures that assess the Quality of Care and
services that Members receive.
National Provider Identifier (NPI) means a unique identification number for Providers.
Contractor must use the NPIs in the administrative and financial transactions adopted
under the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
Network means Primary Care Providers (PCPs), Specialists, hospitals, ancillary
Providers, facilities, and other Providers with whom Contractor enters into a Network
Provider Agreement.
Network Provider means any Provider or entity that has a Network Provider
Agreement with Contractor, Contractor’s Subcontractor, or Contractor’s Downstream
Subcontractor, and receives Medi-Cal funding directly or indirectly to order, refer, or
render Covered Services under this Contract. A Network Provider is not a Subcontractor
or Downstream Subcontractor by virtue of the Network Provider Agreement.
Network Provider Agreement means a written agreement between a Network
Provider and Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor.
[[page 25]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 25 of 642
Network Provider Data means information concerning all Network Providers in a
Network, regardless of location, which render Covered Services to Members in a
Contractor’s Service Area and the provider groups, Subcontractors, and/or Downstream
Subcontractors, if any, under which a Network Provider renders those services. This
includes, but is not limited to, information about the contractual relationship between
Network Providers, provider groups, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors
within the Network, information regarding the facilities where services are rendered, and
information about a Network Provider’s area(s) of specialization.
No Wrong Door means Members receive timely Behavioral Health Services without
delay, regardless of delivery system where they seek care and are able to maintain
treatment relationships with trusted Providers without interruption. This includes
concurrent service provision, whereby Contractor must cover Medically Necessary Non-
specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS) for a Member concurrently receiving
Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS) covered by the county Mental Health Plan
(MHP), and ensure those services are coordinated and not duplicative. Contractor must
ensure compliance with No Wrong Door pursuant to W&I section 14184.402.
Non-Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT) means ambulance, litter van,
wheelchair van, and air medical transportation services. NEMT is used when the
Member's medical and physical condition is such that transport by ordinary means of
public or private conveyance is medically contraindicated, and transportation is required
for the purpose of obtaining needed medical care, and pursuant to 22 CCR sections
51323, 51231.1, and 51231.2, is rendered by licensed Providers.
Non-Medical Transportation (NMT) means transportation of Members to obtain
Covered Services or Excluded Services by passenger car, taxicabs, or other forms of
public or private conveyances, and mileage reimbursement when conveyance is in a
private vehicle arranged by the Member and not through a transportation broker, bus
passes, taxi vouchers, or train tickets. NMT does not include the transportation of sick,
injured, invalid, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated Members by
ambulances, litter vans, or wheelchair vans licensed, operated, and equipped in
accordance with State and local statutes, ordinances, or regulations.
Non-specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS) means all of the following services
that Contractor must provide when they are Medically Necessary, and is provided by
PCPs or by licensed mental health Network Providers within their scope of practice:
A. Mental health evaluation and treatment, including individual, group and family
psychotherapy;
B. Psychological and neuropsychological testing, when clinically indicated to
evaluate a mental health condition;
C. Outpatient services for the purposes of monitoring drug therapy;
[[page 26]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 26 of 642
D. Psychiatric consultation; and
E. Outpatient laboratory, drugs, supplies, and supplements, excluding separately
billable psychiatric drugs claimed by outpatient pharmacy providers via Medi-Cal
Rx.
Operations Period means the period of time between the effective date of the first
month of operations and continues on through the last month of Contractor’s capitation
and provision of services to Members. The Operations Period commences at the
conclusion of the Implementation Period upon DHCS’ acceptance of Contractor’s
completion of any readiness requirements required by DHCS.
Other Health Coverage (OHC) means health coverage from another entity that is
responsible for payment of the reasonable value of all or part of the health care services
provided to a Member. OHC may result from a health insurance policy or other
contractual agreement or legal obligation to pay for health care services provided to a
Member, excluding tort liability. OHC may originate under State (other than the Medi-
Cal program), federal, or local medical care program, or under other contractual or legal
entitlements.
Partially Delegated Subcontractor means a Subcontractor that contractually assumes
some, but not all, duties and obligations of Contractor under the Contract, including, for
example, obligations regarding specific Member populations or obligations regarding a
specific set of services. Individual physician associations and medical groups often
operate as Partially Delegated Subcontractors.
Pass-Through Payment means the “Pass-through payment,” as defined in 42 CFR
section 438.6(a), that has been documented in a rate certification approved by the
federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).
Phaseout Period means the period of time after the date the Operations Period or
Contract extension ends. The Phaseout Period extends until all activities required
during the Phaseout Period for each Service Area are fully completed.
Population Health Management (PHM) means a whole-system, person-centered,
population-health approach to ensuring equitable access to health care and social care
that addresses Member needs. It is based on data-driven risk stratification, analytics,
identifying gaps in care, standardized screening, assessment processes, and holistic
care/case management interventions.
Population Health Management (PHM) Service (also known as Medi-Cal Connect)
means a data backed platform that collects and links Medi-Cal beneficiary information
from disparate sources and performs Risk Stratification and Segmentation (RSS) and
Risk Tiering functions, conducts analytics and reporting, identifies gaps in care,
[[page 27]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 27 of 642
performs other population health functions, and allows for multi-party data access and
use in accordance with State and federal laws, regulations, and policies.
Population Health Management Strategy (PHMS) means an annual deliverable that
Contractor must submit to DHCS requiring Contractor to demonstrate that it is
responding to identified community needs, to provide other updates on its PHM program
as requested by DHCS, and to inform the DHCS quality assurance and Population
Health Management program compliance and impact monitoring efforts.
Population Needs Assessment (PNA) means a multi-year process during which
Contractor will identify and respond to the needs of its Members and the communities it
serves by participating in the Community Health Assessment (CHA) of Local Health
Departments (LHDs) in its Service Area. The findings of the PNA/CHA collaboration will
inform Contractor’s annual PHM Strategy.
Post-Payment Recovery (PPR) means Contractor’s efforts to recover the cost of the
services from other third-party payors responsible for the payment of a Member’s health
care services.
Post-Stabilization Care Services means Covered Services related to an Emergency
Medical Condition that are provided after a Member’s condition is stabilized, in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.114 and 28 CCR section 1300.71.4, to improve or
resolve the Member’s condition.
Potential Member or Potential Enrollee means a Medi-Cal beneficiary who resides in
Contractor’s Service Area and is subject to mandatory Enrollment, or who may
voluntarily elect to enroll, but is not yet enrolled, in a Medi-Cal managed care health
plan, and is in one of the following aid codes:
Aid Group Mandatory Aid Codes Non-Mandatory Aid Codes
Adult &
Family/Optional
Targeted Low-Income
Child
01, 02, 08, 0A, 0E, 2V, 30,
32, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 3A,
3C, 3E, 3F, 3G, 3H, 3L, 3M,
3N, 3P, 3R, 3U, 3W, 47, 54,
59, 5C, 5D, 5V, 72, 7A, 7J,
7S, 7W, 7X, 82, 86, 8E, 8P,
8R, 8U, E6, E7, E8, H1, H2,
H3, H4, H5, K1, M3, M5, M7,
M9, P5, P7, P9, R1, T1, T2,
T3, T4, T5
03, 04, 06, 07, 2P, 2R, 2S, 2T, 2U,
40, 42, 43, 45, 46, 49, 4A, 4F, 4G,
4H, 4K, 4L, 4M, 4N, 4S, 4T, 4U,
4W, 5K, 5L, 76
Adult &
Family/Optional
Targeted Low-Income
Child Dual Eligible
0A, 0E, 2C, 2V, 30, 32, 33,
34, 35, 38, 39, 3A, 3C, 3E,
3F, 3G, 3H, 3L, 3M, 3N, 3P,
3R, 3U, 3W, 47, 54, 59, 5C,
5D, 5V, 72, 7A, 7J, 7S, 7W,
7X, 82, 8E, 8P, 8R, 8U, E6,
03, 04, 06, 07, 40, 42, 43, 45, 46,
49, 4A, 4F, 4G, 4H, 4K, 4L, 4M,
4N, 4S, 4T, 4U, 4W, 5K, 5L
[[page 28]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 28 of 642
Aid Group Mandatory Aid Codes Non-Mandatory Aid Codes
E7, E8, H1, H2, H3, H4, H5,
K1, M3, M5, M7, M9, P5,
P7, P9, R1, T1, T2, T3, T4,
T5
SPD Dual 10, 14, 16,1E, 1H, 1X, 20,
24, 26, 2E, 2H, 36, 60, 64,
66, 6A, 6C, 6E, 6G, 6H, 6J,
6N, 6P, 6V, 6X, L6
SPD 10, 14, 16, 1E, 1H, 20, 24,
26, 2E, 2H, 36, 60, 64, 66,
6A, 6C, 6E, 6G, 6H, 6J, 6N,
6P, 6V, L6
Adult Expansion L1, M1, 7U
Breast and Cervical
Cancer Treatment
Program (BCCTP)
0M, 0N, 0P, 0R, 0T, 0U, 0W
Long-Term Care 13, 23, 53, 63
Long-Term Care Dual 13, 23, 53, 63
Prescription Drug means a drug or medication that can only be accessed through a
Provider’s prescription.
Preventive Care means health care designed to prevent disease, illness, injury, and/or
its consequences.
Primary Care means health care usually rendered in ambulatory settings by Primary
Care Providers (PCP) and mid-level practitioners that emphasizes the Member's
general health needs as opposed to Specialists focusing on specific needs.
Primary Care Provider (PCP) means a Provider responsible for supervising,
coordinating, and providing initial and Primary Care to Members, for initiating referrals,
for maintaining the continuity of Member care, and for serving as the Medical Home for
Members. The PCP is a general practitioner, internist, pediatrician, family practitioner,
non-physician medical practitioner, or obstetrician-gynecologist (OB-GYN). For Senior
and Person with Disability (SPD) Members, a PCP may also be a Specialist or clinic.
Prior Authorization means a formal process requiring a Provider to obtain advance
approval for the amount, duration, and scope of non-emergent Covered Services.
Program Data means data that includes but is not limited to: Grievance data, Appeals
data, medical exemption request denial reports and other continuity of care data, out-of-
Network request data, and Primary Care Provider (PCP) assignment data as of the last
calendar day of the reporting month.
[[page 29]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 29 of 642
Provider means any individual or entity that is engaged in the delivery of services, or
ordering or referring for those services, and is licensed or certified to do so.
Provider Directory means Contractor’s listing of all Network Providers and that
includes the Providers’ contact information, whether the Provider is accepting new
Members, the hours of operation, what languages are available in the Provider’s office
and whether the Provider’s office has accommodations, including offices, exam rooms
and equipment, for people with physical disabilities.
Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism means Contractor’s obligation to include a
timely, fair, and cost-effective dispute resolution process where Network Providers,
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and out-of-Network Providers can submit
disputes.
Provider-Preventable Condition (PPC) means a condition occurring in an inpatient
hospital setting, or a condition occurring in any health care setting, that meets the
criteria as stated in 42 CFR section 447.26(b).
Qualified Autism Services (QAS) Paraprofessional means an individual who is
employed and supervised by a QAS Provider to provide Medically Necessary
Behavioral Health Treatment (BHT) services to Members.
QAS Professional means an Associate Behavioral Analyst, Behavior Analyst, Behavior
Management Assistant, or Behavior Management Consultant, as defined in the
California Medicaid State Plan, who provides Medically Necessary Behavioral Health
Treatment (BHT) services to Members.
QAS Provider means a licensed practitioner or Board-Certified Behavior Analyst
(BCBA) who designs, supervises, or provides Medically Necessary Behavioral Health
Treatment (BHT) services to Members.
Quality Improvement (QI) means systematic and continuous actions that lead to
measurable improvements in the way health care is delivered and outcomes for
Members.
Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee (QIHEC) means a committee
facilitated by Contractor’s medical director, or the medical director’s designee, in
collaboration with the Health Equity officer that meets at least quarterly to direct all
Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program (QIHETP) findings and
required actions.
Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program (QIHETP) means
the systematic and continuous activities to monitor, evaluate, and improve upon the
Health Equity and health care delivered to Members in accordance with the standards
set forth in applicable laws, regulations, and this Contract.
[[page 30]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 30 of 642
Quality Measure Compliance Audit means a thorough assessment of Contractor’s
information system capabilities and compliance with each Healthcare Effectiveness
Data and Information Set (HEDIS®) specification to ensure accurate, reliable, and
publicly reportable data.
Quality of Care means the degree to which health services for Members increase the
likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current professional
standards of care and knowledge.
Quality Performance Measures means tools that help measure healthcare processes,
outcomes, patient perceptions, and organizational structure and/or systems that are
associated with the ability to provide high-quality health care and/or that relate to one or
more quality goals for health care.
Quantitative Treatment Limitation (QTL) means a limit on the scope or duration of a
Covered Service that is expressed numerically.
Rating Period means a period selected by DHCS for which actuarially sound capitation
rates are developed and documented in the rate certification submitted to CMS as
required by 42 CFR section 438.7(a).
Regional Center (RC) means a non-profit, community-based entity that is contracted
by Department of Developmental Services (DDS) and develops, purchases, and
manages services for Members with Developmental Disabilities and their families.
Restricted Provider Database (RPD) means the database maintained by DHCS that
lists Providers who are placed under a Medi-Cal payment suspension while under
investigation based upon a credible allegation of Fraud, or Providers who are placed on
a temporary or indefinite Medi-Cal suspension while under investigation for Fraud or
Abuse, or Enrollment violations.
Retrospective Review means the process of determining Medical Necessity after
treatment has been given.
Risk Sharing Mechanism means any payment arrangement, such as reinsurance, risk
corridors, or stop-loss limits, documented in the CMS-approved rate certification
documents for the applicable Rating Period prior to the start of the Rating Period, that is
developed in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.4, the rate development standards in
42 CFR section 438.5, and generally accepted actuarial principles and practices.
Risk Stratification and Segmentation (RSS) means the process of separating
Member populations into different risk groups and/or meaningful subsets, using
information collected through population assessments and other data sources. RSS
results in the categorization of Members with care needs at all levels and intensities.
[[page 31]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 31 of 642
Risk Tiering means the assigning of Members to standard Risk Tiers (low, medium-
rising, or high), with the goal of determining appropriate care management programs or
specific services.
Rural Health Clinic (RHC) means an entity defined in 42 USC section 1395x(aa)(2) to
provide Primary Care and ambulatory services.
Safety-Net Provider means any Provider of comprehensive Primary Care or acute
hospital inpatient services that provides services to a significant number of Medi-Cal
recipients, patients who receives charity, and/or patients who are medically
underinsured, in relation to the total number of patients served by the Provider.
School Site means a facility or location used for public kindergarten, elementary,
secondary, or postsecondary purposes. “School Site” also includes a location not
owned or operated by a public school, or public school district, if the school or school
district provides or arranges for the provision of Medically Necessary treatment of a
mental health or Substance Use Disorder to its students at that location, including off-
campus clinics, mobile counseling services, and similar locations.
Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) Services means
comprehensive, integrated delivery of early intervention and treatment services for
Members with Substance Use Disorders (SUD), as well as those who are at risk of
developing SUDs.
Senior and Person with Disability (SPD) means a Member who falls under a specific
SPD aid code as defined by DHCS.
Service Area means the county or counties that Contractor is approved to operate in
under the terms of this Contract. A Service Area may be limited to designated zip codes
(under the U.S. Postal Service) within a county.
Service Location means the location where a Member obtains Covered Services under
the terms of this Contract.
Significant Change means changes in Covered Services, benefits, geographic Service
Area, composition of payments to its Network, or Enrollment of a new population.
Site Review means surveys and reviews conducted by DHCS or Contractor to ensure
that Network Provider, Subcontractor, and Downstream Subcontractor sites have
sufficient capacity to provide appropriate health care services, carry out processes that
support continuity and coordination of care, maintain Member safety standards and
practices, and operate in compliance with all applicable federal, State, and local laws
and regulations.
Skilled Nursing Care means Covered Services provided by nurses, technicians, and/or
therapists during a stay in a Skilled Nursing Facility or in a Member’s home.
[[page 32]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 32 of 642
Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) means any facility, place, building, agency, skilled
nursing home, convalescent hospital, nursing home, or nursing facility as defined in 22
CCR section 51121, which is licensed as a SNF by California Department of Public
Health (CDPH) or is a distinct part or unit of a hospital, meets the standard specified in
22 CCR section 51215 of these regulations, except that the distinct part of a hospital
does not need to be licensed as a SNF, and has been certified and enrolled for
participation as a SNF in the Medi-Cal program.
Social Drivers of Health (SDOH) means the environments in which people are born,
live, learn, work, play, worship, and age that affect a wide range of health functioning,
and quality-of-life outcomes and risk. Also known as Health Related Social Needs.
Special Care Center means a center that provides comprehensive, coordinated health
care to California Children’s Services (CCS) and Genetically Handicapped Persons
Program (GHPP) clients with specific medical conditions.
Specialist means a Provider who has completed advanced education and clinical
training in a specific area of medicine or surgery. Specialists include, but are not limited
to, those Specialists listed in W&I section 14197.
Specialty Mental Health Provider means a person or entity who is licensed, certified,
otherwise recognized, or authorized under the California law governing the healing arts
and who meets the standards for participation in the Medi-Cal program to provide
Specialty Mental Health Services.
Specialty Mental Health Service (SMHS) means a Medi-Cal covered mental health
service provided or arranged by county mental health plans for Members in their
counties that need Medically Necessary Specialty Mental Health Services.
Standing Referral means a referral by a Primary Care Provider (PCP) to a Specialist
for more than one visit to the Specialist, as indicated in the treatment plan, if any,
without the Primary Care Provider having to provide a specific referral for each visit.
State means the State of California.
State Hearing means a hearing with a State Administrative Law Judge to resolve a
Member’s dispute about an action taken by Contractor, its Network Providers,
Subcontractors, or Downstream Subcontractors.
State Supported Services means Medi-Cal services that are funded entirely by the
State, and for which the State does not receive matching federal funds. These services
are covered by Contractor through their Secondary Contract with DHCS for State
Supported Services.
[[page 33]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 33 of 642
Street Medicine means a set of health and social services developed specifically to
address the unique needs and circumstances of individuals experiencing unsheltered
homelessness, delivered directly to them in their own environment that Contractor may
offer to their Members. The fundamental approach of Street Medicine is to engage
people experiencing unsheltered homelessness exactly where they are and on their
own terms to maximally reduce or eliminate barriers to care access and follow-through.
Street Medicine utilizes a whole person, patient-centered approach to provide Medically
Necessary health care services, as well as address Social Drivers of Health that impede
health care access.
Street Medicine Provider means a Provider that renders Street Medicine services as
offered by Contractor to their Members. Street Medicine Providers may provide services
in various roles, such as the Member’s assigned Primary Care Provider (PCP), through
a direct contract with the Contractor, as an Enhanced Care Managed (ECM) Provider,
as a Community Supports Provider, or as a referring or treating contracted Provider as
set forth in APL 24-001.
Subacute Care means a level of care needed by a patient who does not require
hospital acute care but who requires more intensive licensed Skilled Nursing Care than
is provided to the majority of Members in a Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF), as defined in
22 CCR section 51124.5.
Subcontractor means an individual or entity that has a Subcontractor Agreement with
Contractor that relates directly or indirectly to the performance of Contractor’s
obligations under this Contract. A Network Provider is not a Subcontractor solely
because it enters into a Network Provider Agreement.
Subcontractor Agreement means a written agreement between Contractor and a
Subcontractor. The Subcontractor Agreement must include a delegation of Contractor’s
duties and obligations under the Contract.
Subcontractor Network means a Network of a Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor, wherein the Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor is delegated
risk and is responsible for arranging for the provision of and paying for Covered
Services as stated in their Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement.
Substance Use Disorder (SUD) means those set forth in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders Fifth Edition, published by the American Psychiatric
Association.
Supplemental Payment means a payment, in addition to the Capitation Payment,
made by DHCS to Contractor in accordance with Exhibit B, Section 1.7 (Supplemental
Payments) of this Contract.
Suspended and Ineligible Provider List means the list containing the names of former
Medi-Cal Providers suspended from or ineligible for participation in the Medi-Cal
[[page 34]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 34 of 642
program. The Suspended and Ineligible Provider List is available online at
https://files.medi-cal.ca.gov/pubsdoco/SandILanding.aspx.
Targeted Case Management (TCM) means services which assist Members within
specified target groups to gain access to needed medical, social, educational, and other
services, as set forth in 42 USC section 1396n(g). In prescribed circumstances, TCM is
available as a Medi-Cal benefit and a discrete service through State or local
government entities and their contractors.
Telehealth means a method of delivering health care services by using information and
communication technologies to facilitate the diagnosis, consultation, treatment,
education, care management, and self-management of a Member’s health care while
the Member is at a separate location from the Provider.
Template Data means data reports submitted to DHCS by Contractors, which includes,
but is not limited to, data of Member populations, health care benefit categories, or
program initiatives.
Third Party Tort Liability (TPTL) means the contractual responsibility or tort liability of
an individual or entity other than Contractor or the Member for the payment of claims for
injuries, or trauma sustained by a Member.
Threshold Languages/Threshold or Concentration Standard Languages means the
non-English threshold and concentration standard languages in which Contractor is
required to provide written translations of Member Information, as determined by DHCS.
Transitional Care Service means a service provided to all Members transferring from
one institutional care setting, or level of care, to another institution or lower level of care,
including home settings.
Treatment Authorization Request (TAR) means certain Fee-For-Service (FFS)
procedures and services that are subject to authorization by Medi-Cal field offices
before reimbursement can be approved.
Tribal Federally Qualified Health Center (Tribal FQHC) means a Tribal Health
Program funded under the authority of Public Law 93-638 at 25 USC sections 5301 et
seq. These Health Programs have elected to participate in Medi-Cal Tribal FQHCs and
are subject to the payment terms of APL 21-008. Reimbursement of Tribal FQHCs is
through an Alternative Payment Methodology (APM), which is set at the federal Indian
Health Service All-Inclusive Rate. The APM rate is updated annually and published in
APL 21-008, Attachment #1. A list of Tribal FQHCs is published in APL 21-008,
Attachment #2.
Tribal Health Program means an American Indian tribe or tribal organization that
operates any health program, service, function, activity, or facility funded, in whole or
part, by the Indian Health Service through, or provided for in, a contract or compact with
[[page 35]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 35 of 642
the Indian Health Service under the Indian Health Service under the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act and is defined in 25 USC section
1603(25).
United States Department of Health and Human Services (U.S. DHHS) means the
federal agency that oversees Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) that
works in partnership with state governments to administer the Medicaid program, the
Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), and health insurance portability
standards.
Urban Indian Organization means a nonprofit corporate body situated in an urban
center, governed by an urban American Indian controlled board of directors, as defined
in 25 USC section 1603(29). Urban Indian Organizations participate in Medi-Cal as
Tribal Federally Qualified Health Centers (Tribal FQHCs) or community clinics and are
reimbursed via the Prospective Payment System or at Fee-For-Service rates.
Urgent Care means services required to prevent serious deterioration of health
following the onset of an unforeseen condition or injury.
Utilization Management (UM) or Utilization Review means the evaluation of the
Medical Necessity, appropriateness, and efficiency of the use of health care services,
procedures, and facilities.
Vaccines for Children (VFC) Program means the federally funded program that
provides free vaccines for eligible Children age 18 or younger (including all Medi-Cal
eligible Children age 18 or younger) and distributes immunization updates and related
information to participating Providers.
Waste means the overutilization or inappropriate utilization of services and misuse of
resources.
Withhold Arrangement means any payment mechanism approved by the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) in accordance with the requirements of 42 CFR
section 438.6(b) under which a portion of a capitation rate is withheld from Contractor,
with a portion or all of the withheld amount to be paid to Contractor for meeting targets
specified in this Contract, including but not limited to Exhibit B, Subsection 1.1.14.E
(Special Contract Provisions Related to Payment).
Working Capital Ratio means a liquidity ratio, calculated as current assets divided by
current liabilities, that measures Contractor’s ability to pay its current liabilities with
current assets. Working Capital Ratio is computed in accordance with Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).
Working Day(s) means Monday through Friday, except for State holidays as identified
at the California Department of Human Resources State Holidays page.
[[page 36]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 36 of 642
“Your Rights” Attachment means Contractor’s written notice sent to the Member that
explains the Member’s rights to challenge, free of charge, Contractor’s action, and the
Member’s right to file an Appeal with Contractor, a Deemed Exhaustion, and the right to
request a State Hearing or an Independent Medical Review (IMR).
[[page 37]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 37 of 642
2.0 Acronyms
Medi-Cal Managed Care Contract Acronyms List
As used in this Contract, unless otherwise expressly provided or the context otherwise
requires, the following acronyms are abbreviations for the corresponding terms. This
Acronyms List is provided for the convenience of the parties and must not be deemed
as an exhaustive or exclusive list of all acronyms in this Contract. In the event that the
acronyms contained in this list are inconsistent with the provisions in the Contract, the
Contract provisions will prevail.
Acronyms Corresponding Terms
AAP American Academy of Pediatrics
ABD Adverse Benefit Determination
ACE Adverse Childhood Experience
ACIP Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
ACOG American College of Obstetrician and Gynecologists
ADA Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
ADHC Adult Day Health Care
ADL Activity of Daily Living
ADO Alternate Dispute Officer
ADT Admission, Discharge, and Transfer
AFS Alternative Format Selection
AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
APL All Plan Letter
API Application Programming Interface
APS Asthma Preventive Service
AR Authorized Representative
ASAM American Society of Addiction Medicine
ASD Autism Spectrum Disorder
Basic PHM Basic Population Health Management
BHT Behavioral Health Treatment
C&L Cultural & Linguistic
CalAIM California Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal
CBAS Community Based Adult Services
CB-CME Community-Based Care Management Entities
CCM Complex Care Management
CCR California Code of Regulations
CCS California Children’s Services
CDPH California Department of Public Health
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CHA Community Health Assessment
[[page 38]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 38 of 642
Acronyms Corresponding Terms
CHIP Community Health Implementation Plan
CHSP Children’s Hospital Supplemental Payment
CHW Community Health Worker
CLIA Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act
CLPPB Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Branch
CMP Care Management Plan
CMS The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
CNM Certified Nurse Midwife
COBA Coordination of Benefits Agreement
COHS County Organized Health Systems
CPSP Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program
CPT Current Procedural Terminology
CQI Continuous Quality Improvement
CRC Caregiver Resource Center
CYSHCN Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs
DDS Department of Developmental Services
DF Disclosure Form
DHCS Department of Health Care Services
DMC Drug Medi-Cal
DMC-ODS Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System
DME Durable Medical Equipment
DMFEA Office of the Attorney General, Division of Medi-Cal Fraud and
Elder Abuse
DMHC Department of Managed Health Care
DOT Direct Observed Therapy
D-SNP Dual-Eligible Special Needs Plan
DUR Drug Use Review
DVBE Disabled Veteran Business Enterprises
ECM Enhanced Care Management
EMT Emergency Medical Transportation
EPSDT Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment
EQR External Quality Review
EQRO External Quality Review Organization
ERS CBAS Emergency Remote Services
FBC Freestanding Birthing Centers
FDA United States Food and Drug Administration
FFP Federal Financial Participation
FFS Fee-For-Service
FQHC Federally Qualified Health Center
FSR Facility Site Review
GAAP Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
[[page 39]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 39 of 642
Acronyms Corresponding Terms
GC California Government Code
H&S Health and Safety Code
HCBS Home and Community-Based Services
HCO Health Care Options
HCPCS Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System
HEDIS® Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set
HIE Health Information Exchange
HIPAA The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996
HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HMO Health Maintenance Organization
HPA Health Plan Accreditation
HUD The United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development
IADL Instrumental Activity of Daily Living
ICD-10 International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision
ICF Intermediate Care Facility
ICF/DD Intermediate Care Facility Developmentally Disabled
ICF/DD-H Intermediate Care Facility/Developmentally Disabled
Habilitative
ICF/DD-N Intermediate Care Facility/Developmentally Disabled Nursing
IEP Individualized Education Plan
IFSP Individualized Family Service Plan
IHA Initial Health Appointment
IHCP Indian Health Care Provider
IHS Indian Health Service
IHSP Individualized Health and Support Plan
IHSS In-Home Supportive Services
IMD Institution for Mental Diseases
IMR Independent Medical Review
IPA Independent Physician/Provider Associations
IPC Individual Plan of Care
IT Information Technology
JC Joint Commission
JI Justice Involved
KKA Knox-Keene Health Care Service Plan Act of 1975
LEA Local Education Agency
LEP Limited English Proficiency
LGA Local Government Agency
LHD Local Health Department
LM Licensed Midwife
[[page 40]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 40 of 642
Acronyms Corresponding Terms
LTC Long-Term Care
LTSS Long-Term Services and Support
MAT Medications for Addiction Treatment (or Medication-Assisted
Treatment)
MCH Maternal and Child Health
MEDS Medi-Cal Eligibility Data System
MFTP Money Follows the Person
MHP County Mental Health Plan
MIS Management and Information System
MLR Medical Loss Ratio
MOC Model of Care
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
MPL Minimum Performance Level
MSSP Multipurpose Senior Service Program
NABD Notice of Adverse Benefit Determination
NAR Notice of Appeal Resolution
NCQA National Committee for Quality Assurance
NDC National Drug Code
NEMT Non-Emergency Medical Transportation
NISTSP National Institute of Standards and Technology Special
Publication
NMT Non-Medical Transportation
NOA Notice of Action
NP Nurse Practitioner
NPI National Provider Identifier
NQTL Non-Quantitative Treatment Limitation
NSMHS Non-specialty Mental Health Service
OHC Other Health Coverage
PACE Program for All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly
PCC California Public Contract Code
PCP Primary Care Provider
PHI Protected Health Information
PHM Population Health Management
PHMS Population Health Management Strategy
PI Personal Information
PIA Prison Industry Authority
PIP Performance Improvement Project
PIR Privacy Incident Reporting
PIU Program Integrity Unit
PL Policy Letter
PNA Population Needs Assessment
[[page 41]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 41 of 642
Acronyms Corresponding Terms
PPC Provider-Preventable Condition
PPR Post-Payment Recovery
PSCI Personal, Sensitive, and/or Confidential Information
QAS Qualified Autism Services
QI Quality Improvement
QIHEC Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee
QIHETP Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation
Program
QSO Qualified Service Organization
QTL Quantitative Treatment Limitation
RC Regional Center
RHC Rural Health Clinic
RPD Restricted Provider Database
RSS Risk Stratification and Segmentation
SBIRT Screening, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment
SDOH Social Drivers of Health
SED Serious Emotional Disturbance
SFTP Secure File Transfer Protocol
SMHS Specialty Mental Health Services
SMI Serious Mental Illness
SNF Skilled Nursing Facility
SPD Senior and Person with Disability
STC Special Terms and Conditions
STD Sexually Transmitted Disease
SUD Substance Use Disorder
TAR Treatment Authorization Request
TB Tuberculosis
TCM Targeted Case Management
TDD Telecommunication Devices for the Deaf
TNE Tangible Net Equity
TPTL Third Party Tort Liability
TTY Telephone Typewriters
U.S. DHHS United States Department of Health and Human Services
UM Utilization Management
US DOJ United States Department of Justice
USC United States Code
USPSTF United States Preventive Services Task Force
VFC Vaccines for Children
W&I Welfare and Institutions Code
WCM Whole Child Model
WIC Women, Infants and Children Supplemental Nutrition Program
[[page 42]]
Exhibit A, Attachment I
Page 42 of 642
[[page 43]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 43 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT II
1.0 Operational Readiness Deliverables and Requirements
This Article describes a non-exhaustive list of Contractor deliverables, activities, and
timeframes to be completed during the Implementation Period before beginning the
Operations Period.
Upon successful completion of operational readiness deliverables and requirements,
DHCS will provide Contractor a written authorization to begin its Operations Period.
The Implementation Period begins with the effective date of the Contract and extends to
the beginning of the Operations Period.
Once the Contract is awarded, DHCS will provide Contractor with a timeline to complete
Implementation Period deliverables and requirements. The table in this Article must not
be deemed as exhaustive, exclusive, or limiting. Contractor must submit all required
operational deliverables consistent with all requirements set forth in this Contract on a
schedule, form, and manner specified by the DHCS. Contractor may be responsible for
additional deliverable requirements or activities during the Implementation Period based
on changes in State and federal law and/or DHCS program needs. Contractor must
comply with any additional requirements, not listed in the tables below, upon DHCS’
request and in the form and manner specified by DHCS.
In the event Contractor fails to submit all deliverables in accordance with the milestones
and timeframes required by DHCS, DHCS may impose Liquidated Damages and
Sanctions in accordance with Exhibit E, Sections 1.1.19 (Sanctions) and 1.20
(Liquidated Damages).
Dual Special Needs Plan
Contractors located in counties that had previously participated in the Coordinated Care
Initiative (Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, San Mateo, and
Santa Clara counties) must have a Dual Special Needs Plan (D-SNP) available to dual
eligible Members for contract year 2024 and 2025 and must have documentation of the
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid approval of the D-SNP by December 2, 2023.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT I – 1.0 DEFINITIONS
No deliverables listed for this Article.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT I – 2.0 ACRONYMS
No deliverables listed for this Article.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT II –1.0 OPERATIONAL READINESS DELIVERABLES
AND REQUIREMENTS
[[page 44]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 44 of 642
See specific contract Sections below for details.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 1.1 PLAN ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0001
Submit documentation of State employees (current and former) who may
present a conflict of interest as defined in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 1.1.3 (Conflict of Interest – Current and Former State
Employees).
R.0002 Submit a complete organizational chart.
R.0003 If Contractor is a subsidiary organization, submit an attestation by the
parent organization that this Contract will be a high priority to the parent
organization.
R.0004 Submit an attestation that the medical decisions made by the medical
director will not be unduly influenced by fiscal or administrative
management.
R.0005 Submit policies and procedures describing the representation and
participation of Medi-Cal Members on Contractor’s public policy advisory
committee.
R.0006 Submit the Knox-Keene license exhibits and forms reflecting current
operation status, as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 1.1
(Plan Organization and Administration) and 28 California Code of
Regulations (CCR) section 1300.51.
R.0007 Submit supporting documentation if Contractor is not currently licensed to
operate in an awarded Service Area, as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Section 1.1 (Plan Organization and Administration).
R.0008 If, within the last five years, Contractor has had a contract terminated or
not renewed for poor performance, nonperformance, or any other reason,
Contractor must submit a summary of the circumstances surrounding the
termination or non-renewal, a description of the parties involved, including
address(es) and telephone number(s). Describe Contractor’s Corrective
Actions to prevent future occurrences of any problems identified.
R.0009 Identify the composition and meeting frequency of any committee
participating in establishing Contractor’s public policy including the
percent of patient/Member consumers. Describe Contractor’s Governing
Board, including the percent of patient/Member consumers, the frequency
of the committee’s report submission to Contractor’s Governing Board,
and the Governing Board’s process for handling reports and
recommendations after receipt.
R.0010 Contractor must submit policies and procedures for ensuring that all
appropriate staff and Network Providers receives annual diversity, Health
Equity, and inclusion training (sensitivity, diversity, communication skills,
and cultural competency/humility training) relating to Members including
completion of required Continuing Medical Education on cultural
competency/humility and implicit bias.
[[page 45]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 45 of 642
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 1.2 FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0012 Submit most recent audited annual financial reports.
R.0013 Submit quarterly Financial Statements with the most recent quarter prior
to execution of the Contract.
R.0014 Submit the Knox-Keene license exhibits reflecting projected financial
viability as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 1.2 (Financial
Information) and 28 CCR section 1300.76.
R.0015 Submit Knox-Keene license Exhibit HH-6 as specified in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 1.2 (Financial Information) and 28 CCR section
1300.51(d)(HH).
R.0016 1) Describe any risk sharing or Incentive Arrangements.
2) Explain any intent to enter into a stop loss option with DHCS.
3) Describe any reinsurance and risk-sharing arrangements with any
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors shown in this
Contract.
4) Submit copies of all policies and agreements.
5) Comply with assumption of financial risk and reinsurance
requirements pursuant to 22 CCR sections 53863 and 53868.
Comply with directed payments requirements pursuant to 42 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.6.
R.0017 Fiscal Arrangements: Submit the Knox-Keene license exhibits as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 1.2 (Financial Information)
and in 28 CCR section 1300.51.
R.0018 Describe systems for ensuring that Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers who are providing services to
Medi-Cal Members, have the administrative and financial capacity to meet
its contractual obligations and requirements, as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 1.2 (Financial Information) and in 22 CCR section
53250 and 28 CCR section 1300.70.
R.0019 Submit financial policies that relate to Contractor’s systems for budgeting
and operations forecasting. The policies should include comparison of
actual operations to budgeted operations, timelines used in the budgetary
process, number of years prospective forecasting is performed, and
variance analysis and follow-up procedures.
R.0020 Describe process to ensure timely filing of required financial reports as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 1.2 (Financial Information).
Contractor must also describe how it will comply with the Administrative
Cost requirements referenced in 22 CCR section 53864(b).
R.0021 Provide letters of financial support, credit, bond, or loan guarantee or
other financial guarantees, if any, in at least the same amount that the
obligations to Members will be performed.
[[page 46]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 46 of 642
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 1.3 PROGRAM INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
PROGRAM
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0022 Submit a Compliance Program, Standard of conduct or code of conduct,
related policies and procedures, and training materials.
R.0023 Organizational chart for the Compliance Program showing key personnel.
R.0024 Submit a Fraud Prevention Program and related policies and procedures,
training materials, and an organizational chart showing key personnel.
R.0025 Submit policies and procedures for the screening, Enrollment of Network
Providers, if Contractor elects to screen and enroll.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 2.1 MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0026 Submit a completed MCO Baseline Assessment Form.
R.0027 If procuring a new Management and Information System (MIS) or
modifying a current system, Contractor must provide a detailed
implementation plan that includes the following:
1) Outline of the tasks required;
2) The major milestones; and
3) The responsible party for all related tasks.
In addition, the implementation plan must also include:
1) A full description of the acquisition of software and hardware,
including the schedule for implementation;
2) Full documentation of support for software and hardware by the
manufacturer or other contracted party;
3) System test flows through a documented process that has specific
control points where evaluation data can be utilized to correct any
deviations from expected results; and
4) Documentation of system changes related to Exhibit G, (Business
Associate Addendum) requirements.
R.0028 Submit a detailed description, including a diagram and/or flow chart, of
how Contractor will monitor the flow of Encounter Data, Network Provider
Data, Program Data, Template Data, and all other data required by this
Contract from origination at the Provider level to Contractor, through
submission to DHCS as well as how Contractor will transmit information
regarding general and specific data quality issues identified by DHCS
from origination to Providers for correction.
R.0029 Submit Encounter Data, Provider data, Program Data, and Template Data
test files as required by DHCS, produced using real or proxy data
processed by a new or modified MIS to DHCS. Production data
submissions from a new or modified MIS may not take place until this test
has been successfully reviewed and approved by DHCS.
[[page 47]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 47 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0030 Submit policies and procedures for the submission of complete, accurate,
reasonable and timely Encounter Data, Provider data, Program Data,
Template Data, and all other data required by this Contract, including how
Contractor will correct data quality issues identified by DHCS.
R.0032 Submit the data security, backup, or other data disaster processes used
in the event of a MIS failure.
R.0033 Submit a detailed description, including details regarding interoperability,
of the proposed and/or existing MIS as it relates to each of the
subsystems described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.1
(Management Information System).
R.0246 Submit policies and procedures to demonstrate how Contractor will
conduct routine testing and monitoring, and update their systems as
appropriate to ensure the Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) are
functioning properly and complying with the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) requirements.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 2.2 QUALITY IMPROVEMENT AND HEALTH
EQUITY TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0035 Submit a flow chart and/or organization chart identifying all components of
the Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program
(QIHETP) including who is involved and responsible for each activity.
R.0036 Submit a flow chart and/or organization chart identifying all components of
the QIHETP including who is involved and responsible for each activity,
for each Fully Delegated Subcontractor, and each health plan
downstream Subcontractor.
R.0037 Submit policies that specify the responsibility of the Governing Board in
the QIHETP.
R.0038 Submit policies for the Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee
(QIHEC) including membership, activities, roles and responsibilities and
reporting relationships to other committees within the organization.
R.0039 Submit policies for each Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s and health plan
Downstream Subcontractor’s QIHEC including membership, activities,
roles and responsibilities, and reporting relationships to other committees
within the organization.
R.0040 Submit procedures outlining how Providers, health plan Subcontractors,
and health plan Downstream Subcontractors will participate in the
QIHETP and Population Needs Assessment (PNA) and how the findings
from both will be shared with Providers, health plan Subcontractors and
health plan Downstream Subcontractors.
[[page 48]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 48 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0041 Submit policies and procedures related to the oversight of Subcontractors
and Downstream Subcontractors for any delegated QIHETP activities,
including a complete list of all Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and their delegated QIHETP activities.
R.0042 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will develop
and submit an annual QIHETP Plan that provides a comprehensive
assessment of all Quality Improvement (QI) and Health Equity activities
undertaken, including an evaluation of the effectiveness of QI and Health
Equity interventions, and an assessment of all Subcontractors’
performance for any delegated QI and/or Health Equity activities.
R.0043 Submit policies and procedures to address how Contractor will meet each
of the following requirements:
1) Quality and Health Equity Performance Measure annual reporting
requirements;
2) Meet or exceed DHCS established Quality and Health Equity
Performance measure benchmarks;
3) Ensure all Fully Delegated Subcontractors meet or exceed DHCS
established Quality and Health Equity Performance measure
benchmarks;
4) Performance Improvement Projects;
5) Consumer Satisfaction Survey;
6) Network Adequacy Validation;
7) Encounter Data Validation;
8) Focused Studies; and
9) Technical Assistance Recommendations.
R.0044 Submit policies and procedures for reporting any disease or condition to
public health authorities.
R.0045 Submit policies and procedures for Credentialing and recredentialing that
ensure all Network Providers who deliver Covered Services to Members
are qualified in accordance with applicable standards and are licensed,
certified, or registered, as appropriate.
R.0046 No later than January 1, 2024, submit either (A) or (B and C):
A. Evidence of National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA)
Health Plan Accreditation.
B. Timeline that demonstrates the NCQA Health Plan Accreditation
process will be started no later than January 1, 2024, and full NCQA
Health Plan Accreditation will be received no later than January 1,
2026.
C. Evidence of interim NCQA Health Plan Accreditation approval within
five Working Days of receipt.
[[page 49]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 49 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0047 No later than January 1, 2024, submit either (A) or (B):
A. Evidence of NCQA Health Equity Accreditation.
B. Timeline that demonstrates the NCQA Health Equity Accreditation
process will be started no later than January 1, 2024, and completed
no later than January 1, 2026.
R.0048 Submit policies and procedures for identifying, evaluating, and reducing
Health Disparities.
R.0049 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor ensures the
adoption, dissemination and monitoring of the use of clinical practice
guidelines.
R.0050 Submit policies and procedures that describe the integration of Utilization
Management into the QIHETP.
R.0051 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will detect
both over- and under-utilization of services, including outpatient
Prescription Drugs.
R.0052 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will ensure
the provision of all screening, preventive and Medically Necessary
diagnostic and treatment services provided for Members less than 21
years of age, and how Contractor will identify and address underutilization
of preventive services for such Members.
R.0053 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will promote
Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment (EPSDT) and
preventive services to Members less than 21 years of age, as well as
outreach to Members less than 21 years of age overdue for such
services.
R.0055 Submit a description of a comprehensive wellness program for Members
less than 21 years of age.
R.0056 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will maintain
and continually monitor, evaluate, and improve Cultural and Linguistic
(C&L) services that support the delivery of Covered Services to Members
less than 21 years of age.
R.0057 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will develop
and maintain a school-linked statewide Network of School Site Behavioral
Health counselors.
R.0058 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will inform
its Network Providers about the Vaccines for Children (VFC) program and
how they will promote and support Enrollment of appropriate Providers in
VFC.
R.0059 Submit policies and procedures that describe Contractor’s Member and
family engagement strategy and how Members and/or parents and
caregivers are engaged in the development of QI and Health Equity
activities and interventions.
[[page 50]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 50 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0060 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will engage
with local entities when developing interventions and strategies to address
deficiencies in performance measures related to Members less than 21
years of age.
R.0061 Submit policies and procedures that describe how Contractor will ensure
the provision of all Medically Necessary mental health and Substance Use
Disorder (SUD) services to Members less than 21 years of age.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 2.3 UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0062 Submit written description of Utilization Management (UM) program that
describes appropriate processes to be used to review, approve, modify,
deny, and delay the provision of medical, mental health, and SUD
services to demonstrate compliance with mental health parity.
R.0063 Submit written description of procedures for reviews and annual updates
of UM program.
R.0064 Submit written description of Grievances and Appeals procedures for
Providers and Members that will be published on Contractor’s website.
R.0065 Submit policies and procedures for Standing Referrals.
R.0066 Submit policies and procedures on Standing Referrals when a Member
condition requires a specialized medical care over a prolonged period of
time.
R.0067 Submit policies and procedures for Prior Authorization, concurrent review,
and Retrospective Review.
R.0068 Submit a list of services requiring Prior Authorization and the Utilization
Review criteria.
R.0069 Submit policies and procedures for the Utilization Review Appeals
process for Providers and Members.
R.0070 Submit policies and procedures that specify timeframes for medical
authorization.
R.0072 Submit policies and procedures to detect both under- and over-utilization
of health care services.
R.0073 Submit policies and procedures showing how UM functions which may be
delegated to a Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor will be
regularly evaluated for compliance with Contract requirements and, that
any issues identified through the UM program are appropriately resolved;
and that UM activities are properly documented and reported.
R.0074 Submit policies and procedures to refer Members who are potentially
eligible for Multipurpose Senior Service Program (MSSP) services to
MSSP services Providers for authorization.
[[page 51]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 51 of 642
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 3.1 NETWORK PROVIDER AGREEMENTS,
SUBCONTRACTOR AGREEMENTS, DOWNSTREAM SUBCONTRACTOR
AGREEMENTS, AND CONTRACTOR’S OVERSIGHT DUTIES
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0075 Submit policies and procedures for a system to evaluate and monitor the
financial viability of all Network Providers, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors.
R.0076
Submit executed Network Provider Agreements/Subcontractor
Agreements/Downstream Subcontractor Agreements or documentation
substantiating Contractor’s efforts to enter into these agreements with the
Local Health Department (LHD) for each of the following public health
services:
1) Family Planning Services;
2) Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) Services;
3) Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) testing and counseling; and
4) Immunizations.
R.0244 Submit all Network Provider, Subcontractor, and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements templates.
R.0245 Submit Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement
templates language showing accountability of any delegated QIHETP
functions and responsibilities.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 3.2 PROVIDER RELATIONS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0077 Submit policies and procedures for the Provider Dispute Resolution
Mechanism.
R.0078 Submit a written description of how Contractor will communicate the
Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism to Network Providers, out-of-
Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors.
R.0079 Submit protocols for payment and communication with out-of-Network
Providers.
R.0080 Submit policies and procedures for ensuring out-of-Network Providers
receive Contractor’s clinical protocols and evidence-based practice
guidelines.
R.0081 Submit copy of Contractor’s Provider manual.
R.0082 Submit a schedule of Network Provider training to be conducted during
year one of operation. Include date, time and location, and complete
curriculum.
R.0083 Submit policies and procedures for ensuring Network Providers receive
training within the required timeframes, regarding clinical protocols,
evidenced-based practice guidelines, and DHCS developed cultural
awareness and sensitivity instruction for Senior and Person with Disability
(SPD) Members.
[[page 52]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 52 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0084 Submit protocols for communicating and interacting with emergency
departments in and out of Contractor’s Service Area.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 3.3 PROVIDER COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENTS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0085 Submit policies and procedures regarding timing of Capitation Payments
to Primary Care Providers (PCP) or clinics.
R.0086 Submit description of any Provider financial incentive programs including,
but not limited to, Physician incentive plans as defined in 42 CFR section
422.208.
R.0087 Submit description of efforts to promote value-based models and
investments in Primary Care using the Health Care Payment Learning and
Action Network Alternative Payment Model (HCP LAN APM) Framework
as outlined in the Alternative Payment Model (APM) Framework White
Paper, https://hcp-lan.org/workproducts/apm-whitepaper.pdf.
R.0088 Submit policies and procedures for processing and payment of claims.
R.0089 Submit policies regarding the prohibition of a claim or demand for services
provided under the Medi-Cal managed care contract to any Member.
R.0090 Submit any Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) and Rural Health
Clinic (RHC) Network Provider Agreements to DHCS for approval.
R.0091 Submit policies and procedures for the reimbursement of non-contracting
Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs) and Nurse Practitioners (NPs).
R.0092 Submit policies and procedures for the reimbursement of Skilled Nursing
Facilities and Nursing Facilities (SNF/NF).
R.0093 Submit policies and procedures for the reimbursement to LHDs and non-
contracting family planning Providers for the provision of family planning
services, STD episode, and HIV testing and counseling.
R.0094 Submit policies and procedures for the reimbursement of immunization
services to LHD.
R.0095 Submit policies and procedures regarding payment to non-contracting
Emergency Services Providers. Include reimbursement schedules for all
non-contracting Emergency Service Providers, including any schedule of
per diem rates and/or Fee-for-Service (FFS) Rates for each of the
following Provider types:
1) PCPs;
2) Medical Groups and Independent Practice Associations;
3) Specialists; and
4) Hospitals.
R.0096 Submit policies and procedures for reporting Provider-Preventable
Conditions.
R.0247 Submit policies and procedures for pre-payment and post-payment claims
review.
[[page 53]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 53 of 642
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.1 MARKETING
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0097 Submit policies and procedures for training and certification of Marketing
Representatives.
R.0098 Submit a description of training program, including the Marketing
Representative’s training/certification manual.
R.0099 Submit Contractor’s Marketing plan.
R.0100 Submit copy of boilerplate request form used to obtain DHCS approval of
participation in a Marketing event.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.2 ENROLLMENTS AND DISENROLLMENTS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0101 Submit policies and procedures for how Contractor will update and
maintain accurate information on its contracting Providers.
R.0102 Submit policies and procedures for how Contractor will access and utilize
Enrollment data from DHCS.
R.0103 Submit policies and procedures relating to Member disenrollment.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.3 POPULATION HEALTH MANAGEMENT AND
COORDINATION OF CARE
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0108 Submit evidence illustrating Contractor’s MIS has the capacity to meet
DHCS data integration and exchange requirements as outlined in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.3 (Data Integration and Exchange).
R.0110 Submit policies and procedures for complying with the Risk
Stratification/Segmentation (RSS) requirements in Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 4.3.5 (Population Risk Stratification and Segmentation, and
Risk Tiering).
R.0111 Submit Contractor’s process(es) describing how Contractor identifies
Significant Changes in Members’ health status or level of care and how
Contractor monitors to ensure appropriate re-stratification.
R.0112 Submit a list of the data used by Contractor’s RSS approach that includes
the required sources in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.5.A.5
(Population Risk Stratification and Segmentation, and Risk Tiering) at a
minimum. For each type of data listed, Contractor must include a
description of the data and its origin, and how the data will be
incorporated into the RSS approach.
R.0113 Submit a description of Contractor’s population RSS and Risk Tiering
approach, as well as the processes for how RSS and Risk Tiers are used
to connect Members to appropriate services.
R.0114 Submit the method of bias analysis used to analyze Contractor’s RSS and
Risk Tiering approach, and the analysis of whether any biases were
identified and if so, how they were corrected.
[[page 54]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 54 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0115 Submit policies and procedures for conducting an initial screening or
assessment of each Member’s needs within 90 days of Enrollment, for
sharing that information with DHCS, other Contractors, or Providers on
behalf of Members, as appropriate, and for monitoring the completion of
the assessments.
R.0116 Submit a description of Contractor’s Complex Care Management (CCM)
program outlining the types of Members, populations and/or program
criteria established, the CCM program’s approach for both long-term
chronic conditions and episodic, temporary interventions, and processes
for fulfilling all the other CCM program requirements outlined in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.7.A.2 (Care Management Programs).
R.0117 Submit policies and procedures for handling care management, and the
non-duplication of services when multiple Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and/or Providers are involved in a Member’s care.
R.0118 Submit policies and procedures for assigning Care Managers to
Members, and monitoring to ensure all Care Managers’ responsibilities
are fulfilled.
R.0119 Submit policies and procedures for documenting and maintaining Care
Management Plans (CMPs).
R.0120 Submit policies and procedures that meet the Basic PHM requirements
outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.8.A (Basic Population
Health Management). Contractor’s policies and procedures should
address core Basic PHM, Care Coordination, care navigation and referral
needs of all Members. Contractor’s policies and procedures must also
address requirements regarding wellness and prevention programs and
chronic disease management programs.
R.0121 Submit evidence that Contractor is providing the Provider resources as
required by Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.8.B (Basic
Population Health Management).
R.0122 Submit policies and procedures for identifying, referring, and providing
EPSDT case management services for Members less than 21 years of
age.
R.0123 Submit policies and procedures for identifying and providing care
management services for Children and Youth with Special Health Care
Needs (CYSHCN).
R.0124 Submit policies and procedures for identifying, referring, and providing
care management services for Members at risk of developmental delay
and eligible to receive services from the local Early Start Program.
R.0125 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of comprehensive
wellness and prevention programs to all Members.
R.0126 Submit policies and procedures for providing Transitional Care Services
as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.11.A (Targeted
Case Management Services).
[[page 55]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 55 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0127 Submit Contractor’s standardized discharge risk assessment that
identifies Members’ risk for re-hospitalization, re-institutionalization, and
substance use recidivism.
R.0128 Submit Contractor’s strategy for developing policies and procedures for
Discharge Planning and Transitional Care Services with each Network
and out-of-Network Provider hospital within its Service Area(s).
R.0129 Submit policies and procedures for ensuring Discharge Planning
documents are completed, and that the documents fulfill the requirements
outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.11.B (Targeted Case
Management Services), and are provided to Members, parents, legal
guardians, or Authorized Representatives (AR) when being discharged
from a hospital, institution, or facility.
R.0131 Submit policies and procedures for coordinating care for Members who
may need or are receiving services and/or programs from out-of-Network
Providers.
R.0132 Submit policies and procedures for identifying and referring the target
populations for Targeted Case Management (TCM) programs within
Contractor’s Service Area(s) and for reaching out to Local Government
Agencies (LGAs) to coordinate care, as appropriate, upon notification
from DHCS that Members are receiving TCM services. Policies and
procedures must include processes for ensuring non-duplicative services.
R.0133 Submit policies and procedures for identifying, referring, and coordinating
care for Members in need of Non-specialty Mental Health Services
(NSMHS), Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS) and/or SUD
treatment services with Contractor’s Network, the County Mental Health
Plan (MHP), Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System (DMC-ODS) or
Drug Medi-Cal, or other community resources. Contractor is required to
use the State-approved screening and transition tools.
R.0134 Submit policies and procedures for identifying, referring, and coordinating
care for Members requiring alcohol or SUD treatment services from both
within and, if necessary, outside Contractor’s Service Area(s) in
partnership with the LGAs responsible for such services.
R.0135 Submit policies and procedures for identifying, referring, and coordinating
care for Members with the local California Children’s Services (CCS)
Program.
R.0136 Submit policies and procedures for the identifying, referring, and
coordinating care for Members with Developmental Disabilities (DD) in
need of non-medical services from the local Regional Center (RC) that
includes the duties of the RC liaison.
R.0137 Submit policies and procedures for ensuring Care Coordination of Local
Education Agency (LEA) services, including PCP involvement in the
development of the Member’s Individualized Education Plan (IEP) or
Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP).
[[page 56]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 56 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0138 Submit policies and procedures for identifying, referring, and ensuring
Care Coordination and non-duplication of services for Members who are
eligible for or who are already receiving contracted school-based services,
such as EPSDT and Behavioral Health Services, from either LEAs,
FQHCs or community-based organizations.
R.0139 Submit policies and procedures for providing required dental services and
dental-related services that includes the duties of Contractor’s dental
liaison.
R.0140 Submit policies and procedures for ensuring case management and Care
Coordination of Members with the LHD Tuberculosis (TB) Control Officer.
Policies and procedures must include assessing and referring Members
with active TB and at risk of non-compliance with TB drug therapy to the
LHD.
R.0141 Submit policies and procedures for identifying and referring eligible
Members for Women, Infants and Children Supplemental Nutrition
Program (WIC) services.
R.0142 Submit policies and procedures for identifying and referring eligible
Members to Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) programs.
Policies and procedures must include processes for ensuring non-
duplicative services.
R.0143 Submit policies and procedures for identifying and referring eligible
Members to the county In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) program, the
duties of Contractor’s IHSS liaison. and ensure compliance with the
requirements outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.21 (In-
Home Supportive Services).
R.0144 Submit policies and procedures that described the duties and
responsibilities of Contractor’s Indian Health Care Provider (IHCP) tribal
liaison in working with IHCPs within Contractor’s Service Area(s).
R.0248 Submit policies and procedures that describe the duties and
responsibilities of Contractor’s managed care liaisons, including training
and notification requirements for each of the following required liaisons:
1) Long-Term Services and Supports (LTSS) Liaison;
2) Transportation Liaison;
3) CCS Liaison; and
4) County Child Welfare Liaison.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.4 ENHANCED CARE MANAGEMENT
[[page 57]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 57 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0145 Submit an Enhanced Care Management (ECM) Model of Care (MOC)
using the DHCS approved template. If Contractor has a previously
approved MOC for implementation of ECM effective January 1, 2022, or
July 1, 2022, Contractor may submit an attestation stating that there are
no changes to the previously approved MOC. If Contractor has changes
to a previously approved MOC, Contractor must submit an updated MOC
with all changes in track-edits for DHCS review and approval. Contractor
must submit to DHCS any Significant Changes to its MOC for DHCS
review and approval at least 60 calendar days in advance of any
occurrence of changes or updates, pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.4.5.D (Enhanced Care Management Model of Care) and in
accordance with DHCS policies and guidance, including All Plan Letters
(APLs). Significant Changes may include, but are not limited to, changes
to Contractor’s approach to administer or deliver ECM services, approved
policies and procedures, and Subcontractor Agreements and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements boilerplates.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.5 COMMUNITY SUPPORTS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0146 Submit a Community Supports MOC using the DHCS approved template.
If Contractor has a previously approved MOC for implementation of
Community Supports effective January 1, 2022, or July 1, 2022,
Contractor may submit an attestation stating that there are no changes to
the previously approved MOC. If Contractor has changes to a previously
approved MOC, Contractor must submit an updated MOC with all
changes in track-edits for DHCS review and approval. Contractor must
submit to DHCS any changes to its MOC for DHCS review and approval
at least 60 calendar days in advance of any occurrence of changes or
updates, pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.5.D
(Community Supports Model of Care) and in accordance with DHCS
policies and guidance, and APLs. Substantial changes may include, but
are not limited to, changes to Contractor’s approach to administer or
deliver Community Supports services; approved policies and procedures;
and Network Provider Agreement, Subcontractor Agreements, or
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements boilerplates, as appropriate.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.6 MEMBER GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL SYSTEM
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0147 Submit policies and procedures relating to Contractor’s Member
Grievance and Appeal system including compiling, aggregating, and
reviewing Grievance and Appeal data.
[[page 58]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 58 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0148 Submit policies and procedures for Contractor’s oversight of the Member
Grievance and Appeal system for the receipt, processing and distribution
of Grievance and Appeals, including the expedited review of Appeals.
Include a flow chart to demonstrate the process.
R.0149 Submit policies and procedures relating to Contractor’s Grievances and
the expedited review of Grievances as required by 42 CFR sections
438.402, 438.406, and 438.408, 28 CCR sections 1300.68 and
1300.68.01, and 22 CCR section 53858.
R.0150 Submit policies and procedures relating to the resolution of Discrimination
Grievances.
R.0151 Submit policies and procedures relating to Contractor’s Appeals process.
Include Contractor’s responsibilities in State Hearings, Independent
Medical Review, and expedited Appeals.
R.0152 Submit format for monthly Grievance and Appeal report.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.1 MEMBER SERVICES
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0153 Submit policies and procedures that address Member’s rights and
responsibilities. Include method for communicating them to both Members
and Providers.
R.0154 Submit policies and procedures for training Contractor’s Member Services
staff on Member rights, responsibilities, and services available under this
Contract.
R.0155 Submit policies and procedures for training Contractor’s Network
Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors on Member
rights, Covered Services, and other responsibilities.
R.0156 Submit policies and procedures for handling Member Grievances not
related to an Adverse Benefit Determination (ABD).
R.0157 Submit policies and procedures for providing communication access to
Members in alternative formats or through other methods that ensure
communication, including assistive listening systems, sign language
interpreters, captioning, written communication, electronic format, plain
language or written translations and oral interpreters, including Limited
English Proficiency (LEP) Members, or non-English speaking.
R.0158 Submit policies and procedures regarding compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code (USC) section 12101
et seq.), Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 USC section
794), Section 1557 of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (42
USC section 18116), SB 223 (Atkins, Chapter 771, Statutes of 2017), and
SB 1423 (Hernandez, Chapter 568, Statutes of 2018), and Government
Code(GC) section 11135, as required in APL 21-011.
[[page 59]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 59 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0159 Submit the following consistent with the requirements of Exhibit E, Section
1.1.23 (Confidentiality of Information). Submit policies addressing
Member’s rights to confidentiality of medical information. Include
procedures for release of medical information and the right to amend or
correct Medical Records pursuant to 45 CFR sections 164.524 and
164.526.
R.0160 Submit policies and procedures for addressing Advance Directives.
R.0161 Submit policies and procedures for the training of Member services staff.
R.0162 Submit policies and procedures regarding the development content and
distribution of Member information. Address appropriate reading level and
translation of materials.
R.0163 Submit final approved Member Identification Card and Member
Handbook.
R.0164 For non-COHS Contractors, submit policies and procedures explaining
the Member’s right to an Independent Medical Review (IMR) including
when an expedited IMR is available to the Member.
R.0165 Submit policies and procedures explaining the Member’s right to a State
Hearing after receiving a Notice of Appeal Resolution or in cases of
Deemed Exhaustion. These policies and procedures must also include
the information on the Member’s right to an expedited State Hearing if
his/her health condition is in jeopardy.
R.0166 Submit policies and procedures and live notice Contractor will send to
Members advising them of how to obtain Member informing materials
including the Member Handbook, and Provider Directory.
R.0167 Submit policies and procedures on the Member’s right to disenroll at any
time to enroll in another Medi-Cal Managed Care Plan pursuant to 22
CCR section 53891(c).
R.0168 Submit policies and procedures for notifying Members of changes in
availability or location of Covered Services.
R.0169 Submit policies and procedures for Member selection of a PCP or non-
physician medical practitioner. Include the mechanism used for allowing
SPD Members to request a Specialist to serve as their PCP.
R.0170 Submit policies and procedures for Member Assignment to a PCP.
Include the use of FFS utilization data and other data in linking a SPD to a
PCP, or Specialist acting as the SPD’s PCP.
R.0171 Submit policies and procedures for notifying the PCP that a Member has
selected or has been assigned to within ten calendar days from the
selection or assignment.
R.0172 Submit policies and procedures demonstrating how, upon entry into
Contractor’s Network, the relationship between Traditional and Safety-Net
Providers and the Member is not disrupted, to the maximum extent
possible.
[[page 60]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 60 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0173 Submit policies and procedures for notifying Members of an ABD for
denial, deferral, or modification of requests for Prior Authorization,
including explanation of Deemed Exhaustion to the Member.
R.0249 Submit policies and procedures to demonstrate how, for dates of service
on or after January 1, 2016, Contractor will make the data it maintains
available within one Working Day of receipt data or information, or one
Working Day after a claim is adjudicated or Encounter Data is received.
R.0250 Submit policies and procedures to demonstrate how Contractor will
update its Provider Directory API at least weekly after receiving updated
Provider information or being notified of any information that affects the
content or accuracy of the Provider Directory.
R.0251 Submit a hard copy of the patient access API and Provider Directory API
documentation and the publicly accessible link or web URL where each
API is located. The documentation must be accessible without any
preconditions to access, and contents must include at a minimum the
following information:
1) API syntax, function names, required and optional parameters
supported and their data types, return variables and their
types/structures, exceptions and exception handling methods and
their returns;
2) The software components and configurations an application must
use to successfully interact with the API and process its response(s);
and
3) All applicable technical requirements and attributes necessary for an
application’s registration with any authorized server(s) deployed in
conjunction with the API.
R.0252 Submit a hard copy and a link to Contractor’s publicly accessible Member
educational resources that will achieve the following:
1) Demonstrate the steps Member may consider taking to help protect
the privacy and security of their health information and the
importance of understanding the security and privacy practices of
any application to which they entrust their health information; and
2) Provide an overview of which types of organizations or individuals
are and are not likely to be HIPAA covered entities, the oversight
responsibilities of the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) and the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC), and how to submit a complaint to OCR
and FTC.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.2 NETWORK AND ACCESS TO CARE
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0174 Submit policies and procedures on how Contractor will assist Members in
selecting PCPs who are accepting new patients and how it will afford
access to Primary Care and specialty care.
[[page 61]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 61 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0175 Submit complete 274 Provider File demonstrating the ability to serve 60
percent of Potential Members, including SPD Members, in each of the
counties that Contractor serves pursuant to this Contract.
R.0176 Submit policies and procedures for how Contractor will meet federal
requirements for access and reimbursement Network and/or out-of-
Network FQHC, RHC, Freestanding Birthing Center (FBC) services,
CNMs, and Licensed Midwives (LMs).
R.0177 Submit policies and procedures that establish traditional and Safety-Net
Provider participation standards.
R.0178 Submit policies and procedures describing how Contractor will monitor
Provider to Member ratios to ensure they are within specified standards.
R.0179 Submit policies and procedures regarding Physician supervision of non-
physician medical practitioners.
R.0180 Submit policies and procedures to monitor and ensure how Contractor,
Network Providers, Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors
comply with timely access requirements for each of the following:
1) Standards for timely appointments;
2) Appropriate clinical timeframes;
3) Shortening or expanding timeframes;
4) Follow up appointments;
5) Triaging Member calls;
6) Telephone interpreters; and
7) Contractor’s customer service line.
R.0181 Submit policies and procedures for how Contractor will ensure Network
Provider hours of operation are no less than the hours of operation
offered to other commercial or FFS recipients.
R.0182 Submit a policy regarding the availability of Contractor’s Medi-Cal director
or licensed Physician 24-hours-a-day, 7-days-a-week, and procedures for
communicating with emergency room personnel.
R.0183 Submit all documents outlined for the Network Certification demonstrating
that the proposed Network meets the appropriate Network adequacy
standards set forth in this Contract and Welfare and Institutions Code
(W&I) section 14197. See APL 23-001 for document specification and
submission guidelines. Network certification must be submitted in
accordance with the requirements placed upon DHCS pursuant to 42
CFR section 438.66(e).
R.0184 Submit policies and procedures for providing Emergency Services
including 24-hr. /day access without Prior Authorization, follow-up and
coordination of emergency care services.
R.0185 Submit policies and procedures for authorizing and arranging for out-of-
Network access, including arranging transportation services for Members
to access the out-of-Network Providers.
[[page 62]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 62 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0186 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of and access to each of
the following:
1) Family planning services;
2) STD services;
3) HIV testing and counseling services;
4) COVID therapeutics (see APL 22-009);
5) Pregnancy termination;
6) Minor Consent Services;
7) Immunizations;
8) I HCP services;
9) CNM and NP services;
10) NSMHS for minors; and
11) Medication for Addiction Treatment (MAT).
R.0187 Submit policies and procedures for the timely referral and coordination of
Covered Services to which Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor has moral objections to perform or otherwise support.
R.0188 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of 24 hour interpreter
services at key points of contact.
R.0189 Submit policies and procedures regarding Contractor, Subcontractor, and
Downstream Subcontractor compliance with State and federal language
and communication assistance requirements.
R.0190 Submit policies and procedures regarding Contractor, Subcontractor, and
Downstream Subcontractor compliance with civil rights laws requiring
access for Members with disabilities.
R.0191 Submit a written description of the C&L services program and policies and
procedures for monitoring and evaluation of the C&L services program.
R.0192 Submit an analysis demonstrating the ability of Contractor’s Network to
meet the ethnic, cultural, and linguistic needs of Contractor’s Members.
R.0193 Submit policies and procedures for providing cultural competency/humility,
sensitivity or diversity training for staff, Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors at key points of contact.
R.0194 Submit policies and procedures describing Contractor’s Member and
family engagement strategy and how Contractor will ensure Member
and/or parent and caregiver input into appropriate policies and decision-
making.
[[page 63]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 63 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0195 Submit policies and procedures describing how Contractor will ensure the
following with regards to the Community Advisory Committee (CAC):
1) How Contractor will ensure a diverse membership on the CAC that is
reflective of Contractor’s Service Area and includes adolescents
and/or parents/caregivers of Members less than 21 years of age;
2) How Contractor will support Member participation in the CAC;
3) How Contractor will ensure the CAC will be involved in appropriate
policies and decision-making;
4) How Contractor will actively facilitate communication and connection
between the CAC and Contractor leadership.
R.0196 Submit policies and procedures for providing continuity of care including
the completion of Covered Services by Providers and out-of-Network
Providers.
R.0197 Submit policies and procedures for performance of Facility Site Reviews
(FSR) and Medical Record reviews (FSR Attachments A and B), and
performance of Facility Site physical accessibility reviews (FSR
Attachment C).
R.0198 Submit the aggregate results of pre-operational Site Reviews to DHCS at
the request of DHCS. The aggregate results must include all data
elements specified by DHCS.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.3 SCOPE OF SERVICES
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0199 Submit policies and procedures, including standards, for the provision of
each of the following services for Members less than 21 years of age:
1) Children’s preventive services;
2) Immunizations;
3) Blood Lead screens; and
4) EPSDT services.
R.0200 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of adult preventive
services, including immunizations.
R.0201 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of each of the following
services to pregnant Members:
1) Prenatal and postpartum care;
2) Use of American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(ACOG) standards and guidelines;
3) Comprehensive risk assessment tool for all pregnant Members; and
4) Referral to Specialists.
R.0202 Submit a list of appropriate hospitals available within the Network that
provide necessary high-risk pregnancy services.
[[page 64]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 64 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0203 Provide a detailed description of health education system including
policies and procedures regarding delivery of services, administration,
and oversight.
R.0204 Provide a list and schedule of all health education classes and/or
programs.
R.0205 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of Emergency Medical
Transportation (EMT), Non-Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT),
and Non-Medical Transportation (NMT).
R.0206 Submit policies and procedures that define and describe what mental
health services are to be provided by a licensed mental health care
Provider.
R.0208 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of Major Organ
Transplants as Covered Services.
R.0209 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of Long-Term Care
(LTC) as Covered Services.
R.0210 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of services at non-
contracted LTC facilities.
R.0211 Submit policies and procedures for conducting a Drug Use Review (DUR).
R.0212 Submit policies and procedures for the UM of covered pharmaceutical
services, demonstrating compliance with mental health parity
requirements set forth in 42 CFR section 438.900 et seq.
R.0213 Submit policies and procedures for the coverage of clinical trials and
routine patient care costs.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.4 COMMUNITY BASED ADULT SERVICES
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0215 Submit policies and procedures for referring a Member to a Community
Based Adult Services (CBAS) Provider.
R.0216 Submit policies and procedures on arranging for the provision of CBAS
unbundled services.
R.0217 Submit all policies and procedures required by the California Advancing
and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) Terms and Conditions, Section V.A.23.
R.0218 Submit policies and procedures for the initial assessment and
reassessment of Members for eligibility to receive CBAS, including
circumstances where Contractor may forgo a face-to-face review if
eligibility has already been determined through another process.
R.0219 Submit policies and procedures for an expedited assessment process.
R.0220 Submit final draft of the written notice to be sent to Members after a CBAS
assessment determination that results in a change to the Member’s CBAS
benefit.
R.0253 Submit all policies and procedures on providing CBAS Emergency
Remote Services (ERS).
[[page 65]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 65 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0254 Submit policies and procedures for community participation for Members
receiving CBAS.
R.0255 Submit policies and procedures for notifying DHCS of payments made to
a CBAS Provider involved in a credible allegation of Fraud.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.5 MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE
DISORDER BENEFITS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0207 Submit policies and procedures for when a Member becomes eligible for
SMHS and/or SUD treatment services during the course of receiving
NSMHS, including how Contractor will use required State-approved
transition of care tool for coordinating care between Contractor and
MHPs.
R.0213 Submit policies and procedures for handling of psychiatric emergencies
during non-business hours.
R.0214 Submit policies and procedures for verifying the credentials of licensed
mental health Providers of NSMHS.
R.0222 Submit policies and procedures for entering into agreements with MHPs,
Non-specialty Mental Health Services Providers, county DMC-ODS plans,
counties administering California Medicaid State Plan benefits, and SUD
treatment Providers in order to comply with access standards and Care
Coordination requirements, including those concerning the concurrent
provision of covered NSMHS and SMHS consistent with WI section
14184.402(f)(1).
R.0223 Submit policies and procedures for the provision of SUD services
including drug and alcohol Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral to
Treatment (SBIRT) services, including:
1) Provision of SBIRT by a Member’s PCP to identify, reduce, and
prevent problematic substance use;
2) Referral, without requiring Prior Authorization, for SBIRT services for
Members whose PCPs do not offer SBIRT services; and
3) Referral of Members to SUD treatment without requiring Prior
Authorization, when there is a need beyond SBIRT services.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.6 MOUs WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES, COUNTY PROGRAMS, AND THIRD PARTIES
[[page 66]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 66 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0224 Submit executed MOUs, or documentation substantiating Contractor’s
efforts to negotiate MOUs to coordinate programs and services for
Members with LGAs, third-party entities and county programs in
Contractor’s Service Area, even if Contractor is coordinating care and not
financially responsible, to ensure Care Coordination, data sharing, and
non-duplicative services for Members, including, but not limited to:
1) LHDs in each County within Contractor’s Services Area for the
following programs and services:
a) CCS;
b) Maternal and Child Health (MCH);
c) TB Direct Observed Therapy (DOT); and
d) Community Health Workers (CHW).
2) WIC agencies in each county within Contractors' Service Area.
3) LGAs such as the County Behavioral Health Department and
County Social Services Department, in each county within
Contractors' Service Area to assist with coordinating the following
programs and services:
a) SMHS;
b) Alcohol and SUD treatment services, including counties
administering State plan Drug Medi-Cal benefits and counties
participating in DMC-ODS; and
c)IHSS.
4) LGAs to coordinate programs and services for Members in each
county within Contractors Service Area at a minimum:
a) Social Services; and
b) Child welfare departments.
5) RCs for persons with DDs.
R.0225 Submit executed MOUs, or documentation substantiating Contractor’s
efforts to negotiate MOUs to coordinate programs and services for
Members with LGAs, third-party entities, and county programs in
Contractor’s Service Area, even if Contractor is coordinating care and not
financially responsible, to ensure Care Coordination, data sharing, and
non-duplicative services for Members, including at a minimum:
1) LEAs for IEPs or IFSPs;
2) California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, County Jails,
and youth correctional facilities, as applicable
3) Third-party entities in each county within Contractor’s Service Area, at
a minimum:
a) HCBS program agencies;
b) Continuums of Care;
c) First 5 county commissions;
R.0226 Submit policies and procedures for exchanging Member Information with
MHPs and DMC-ODS or county Drug Medi-Cal Programs in compliance
with State and federal privacy laws and regulations.
[[page 67]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 67 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0227 Submit policies and procedures for maintaining collaboration among the
parties to the MOU and monitoring and assessing the effectiveness of
MOUs. Policies and procedures should include the requirement to review
its MOUs annually for any needed modifications or renewal of
responsibilities and obligations.
R.0228 Submit executed MOUs, or documentation substantiating Contractor’s
efforts to negotiate MOUs to coordinate programs and services for
Members with LGAs in each county within Contractor’s Service Area to
assist with coordinating, at a minimum, Targeted Case Management
(TCM).
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 6.0 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND
RESPONSE
No deliverables listed for this Article. (To Become Effective on January 1, 2025)
EXHIBIT B, BUDGET DETAIL AND PAYMENT PROVISIONS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0233 Submit documentation of the Coordination of Benefits Agreement (COBA)
that Contractor has entered into with Medicare.
EXHIBIT C, GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
No deliverables listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT D(f), SPECIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
No deliverables listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT E, PROGRAM TERMS AND CONDITIONS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0234 Submit policies and procedures explaining Contractor’s data certification
reporting method. Policies and procedures must include a template
certification statement.
R.0235 Submit policies and procedures for the treatment of recoveries, including
retention policies, process, timeframes, and documentation for reporting,
for all recovery of overpayments.
R.0236 Submit policies and procedures for how Contractor will comply with Cost
Avoidance and Post-Payment Recovery for Members with Other
Healthcare Coverage (OHC).
R.0237 Submit policies and procedures for how Contractor will comply with Third-
Party Tort and Worker’s Compensation Liability.
[[page 68]]
Exhibit A, Attachment II
Page 68 of 642
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0238 Submit policies and procedures for how Contractor will comply with an
investigation or a prosecution conducted by the Division of Medi-Cal
Fraud and Elder Abuse (DMFEA) and/or the United States Department of
Justice (US DOJ), including communicating requirements with
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors.
EXHIBIT F, CONTRACTOR’S RELEASE
No deliverables listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT G, BUSINESS ASSOCIATE ADDENDUM
No deliverables listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT H, CONFLICT OF INTEREST AVOIDANCE REQUIREMENTS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0241 Submit updated report on any conflicts of interest and/or conflict
avoidance plan, if requested by DHCS.
EXHIBIT I, CONTRACTOR’S PARENT GUARANTY REQUIREMENTS
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0242 Submit parent guaranty, if applicable.
EXHIBIT J, DELEGATION REPORTING AND COMPLIANCE PLAN
Identifier Operational Readiness Requirement
R.0243 Submit delegation reporting and compliance plan (Template A, B, and C).
EXHIBIT K, EXCLUDED PROVISIONS AS TO CONTRACTORS NOT LICENSED
PURSUANT TO THE KNOX-KEENE HEALTH CARE SERVICE PLAN ACT OF 1975
No deliverables listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT L, REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC TO CONTRACTOR
Any deliverables for Contractor-specific requirements will be stated in Exhibit L.
[[page 69]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 69 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
1.0 Organization
The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) seeks to ensure that only those
managed care plans that have the organizational capacity, leadership, financial
well-being, commitment to invest in our communities, and demonstrated ability to
ensure program integrity and compliance with all applicable federal and State
requirements and standards under this Contract, may be Contractors.
Article 1.0 outlines DHCS’ requirements for plan organization and administration
including key leadership roles, including the designation of a Chief Health Equity
Officer having the authority to design and implement policies that ensure Health
Equity is prioritized and addressed. Key personnel changes, including those
relevant to Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors, must
be reported to DHCS in a timely fashion. The financial health and well-being of
Contractors are vital to ensuring access to Medi-Cal Covered Services, and, as
such DHCS, requires reporting of financial data for review. In addition, DHCS will
ensure minimum loss ratios are in place for Contractors, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors who take financial risk to provide services for
Members. Additionally, requiring that a portion of profits invested back into the
community, will help ensure that Contractors are seeking opportunities to work at
a local level to further efforts to address Social Drivers of Health (SDOH) and
drive improvements in quality, equity, and access to care.
Article 1.0 also outlines requirements for Contractors to ensure that they have a
clear compliance plan to meet the requisite personnel, processes, and capacity
as outlined in the Contract.
[[page 70]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 70 of 642
1.1 Plan Organization and Administration
1.1.1 Legal Capacity
1.1.2 Key Personnel Disclosure Form
1.1.3 Conflict of Interest – Current and Former State Employees
1.1.4 Contract Performance
1.1.5 Medical Decisions
1.1.6 Medical Director
1.1.7 Chief Health Equity Officer
1.1.8 Key Personnel Changes
1.1.9 Administrative Duties/Responsibilities
1.1.10 Member Representation
1.1.11 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Training
[[page 71]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 71 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
1.1 Plan Organization and Administration
1.1.1 Legal Capacity
Contractor must maintain the legal capacity to contract with Department of Health
Care Services (DHCS) and, if required, maintain appropriate licensure as a
health care service plan in accordance with the Knox-Keene Health Care Service
Plan Act of 1975 (KKA) as amended (Health and Safety Code (H&S) section
1340 et seq.). If Contractor is not currently licensed to operate in an awarded
Service Area, within 30 Working Days of award of Contract, it must submit a
material modification to its license to the Department of Managed Health Care
(DMHC) requesting authorization to operate in the Service Area. Contractor must
submit proof of its material modification submission to DHCS concurrently.
Operations Period will not begin until the material modification is approved by
DMHC. Within three Working Days of approval, Contractor must submit a copy of
its approved and amended Knox-Keene license to DHCS.
1.1.2 Key Personnel Disclosure Form
A. Contractor must file an annual statement with DHCS disclosing any
purchases or leases of services, equipment, supplies, or real property
from an entity in which any of the following persons have a substantial
financial interest:
1) Any person or corporation having five percent or more ownership or
controlling interest in Contractor;
2) Any director, officer, partner, trustee, or employee of Contractor;
and
3) Any member of the immediate family of any person designated in 1)
or 2) above.
B. Contractor must comply with 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
sections 455.104 (Disclosure by Medicaid providers and fiscal agents:
Information on ownership and control), 455.105 (Disclosure by providers:
Information related to business transactions), 455.106 (Disclosure by
providers: Information on persons convicted of crimes), and 438.610
(Prohibited affiliations).
[[page 72]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 72 of 642
1.1.3 Conflict of Interest – Current and Former State Employees
A. This Contract will be governed by the conflict of interest provisions of 42
CFR sections 438.3(f)(2) and 438.58 and 22 California Code of
Regulations (CCR) sections 53874 and 53600.
B. In the performance of this Contract, Contractor will not utilize any State
officer, employee in State civil service, other appointed State official, or
intermittent State employee, or contracting consultant for DHCS, unless
the employment, activity, or enterprise is required as a condition of the
officer's or employee's regular State employment.
1.1.4 Contract Performance
Contractor must maintain the necessary organization and level of staffing to
implement and operate this Contract in accordance with 28 CCR section
1300.67.3 and 22 CCR sections 53800, 53851, and 53857. Contractor must
ensure the following:
A. Contractor has an accountable Governing Board;
B. Compliance with this Contract is a high priority and that Contractor is
committed to supplying any necessary resources to assure full
performance of the Contract;
C. If Contractor is a subsidiary organization, its parent organization provides
an attestation confirming that this Contract will be a high priority to the
parent organization and committing to supply any necessary resources to
assure full performance of the Contract;
D. Adequate staffing in medical and other health services, fiscal and
administrative capacity sufficient to effectively conduct Contractor’s
business; and
E. Written procedures are developed and maintained for conducting
Contractor’s business, including the provision of health care services, in
compliance with federal and State Medicaid law.
1.1.5 Medical Decisions
Contractor must ensure that medical decisions, including those by
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, Network Providers, and other
Providers, are not unduly influenced by fiscal and administrative management.
1.1.6 Medical Director
[[page 73]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 73 of 642
Contractor must appoint a physician as medical director pursuant to 22 CCR
section 53857 whose responsibilities must include, but should not be limited to,
the following:
A. Ensuring that medical and other health services decisions are:
1) Rendered by qualified medical personnel; and
2) Not influenced by fiscal or administrative management
considerations.
B. Ensuring that the medical and other health care provided meets
acceptable standards of care;
C. Ensuring that Contractor’s medical personnel follow medical protocols and
rules of conduct;
D. Developing and implementing medical policy consistent with applicable
standards of care;
E. Resolving Grievances related to Quality of Care;
F. Participating directly in the implementation of Quality Improvement and
Health Equity activities;
G. Participating directly in the design and implementation of the Population
Health Management Strategy and initiatives, including Population Needs
Assessment design, planning, and implementation to inform Strategy;
H. Participating actively in the execution of Grievance and Appeal
procedures;
I. Ensuring that Contractor engages with local health departments; and
J. Posting medical director contact information in an easily accessible
location on their provider portal website.
1.1.7 Chief Health Equity Officer
Contractor must maintain a full-time Chief Health Equity Officer who has the
necessary qualifications or training at the time of hire or within one year of hire to
meet the requirements of the position. The Chief Health Equity Officer
responsibilities must include, but should not be limited to, the following:
[[page 74]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 74 of 642
A. Provide leadership in the design and implementation of Contractor’s
strategies and programs to ensure Health Equity is prioritized and
addressed;
B. Ensure all Contractor policy and procedures consider Health Inequities
and are designed to promote Health Equity where possible, including but
not limited to:
1) Marketing strategy;
2) Medical and other health services policies;
3) Member and provider outreach;
4) Community Advisory Committee;
5) Quality Improvement activities, including delivery system reforms;
6) Grievance and Appeals; and
7) Utilization Management.
C. Develop and implement policies and procedures aimed at improving
Health Equity and reducing Health Disparities;
D. Engage and collaborate with Contractor staff, Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, Network Providers, and entities including,
but not limited to local community-based organizations, local health
departments, Behavioral Health and social services, Child welfare
systems and Members in Health Equity efforts and initiatives;
E. Implement strategies designed to identify and address root causes of
Health Inequities, which includes but is not limited to systemic racism,
Social Drivers of Health, and infrastructure barriers;
F. Develop targeted interventions designed to eliminate Health Inequities;
G. Develop quantifiable metrics that can track and evaluate the results of the
targeted interventions designed to eliminate Health Inequities;
H. Ensure all Contractor, Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, and
Network Provider staff receive mandatory diversity, equity and inclusion
training (sensitivity, diversity, communication skills, and cultural
competency/humility training) as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.11.C. (Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees)
annually. This includes, but is not limited to:
[[page 75]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 75 of 642
1) Reviewing training materials to ensure the materials are up to date
with current standards of practice; and
2) Maintaining records of training completion.
1.1.8 Key Personnel Changes
Contractor must report to DHCS Contract Manager any changes in the status of
the executive-level personnel including, but not limited to the chief executive
officer, chief financial officer, chief operations officer, the chief medical director,
the chief Health Equity officer, the compliance officer, and government relations
persons within ten calendar days. Contractor must also report to DHCS Contract
Manager any changes in the status of the executive-level personnel for Fully
Delegated Subcontractors, Partially Delegated Subcontractors, Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractors, and Downstream Partially Delegated
Subcontractors including, but not limited to the chief executive officer, chief
financial officer, chief operations officer, the medical director, the chief Health
Equity officer, the compliance officer, and government relations persons within 20
calendar days.
1.1.9 Administrative Duties/Responsibilities
Contractor must maintain the organizational and administrative capabilities to
carry out Contractor’s duties and responsibilities under the Contract. At a
minimum, Contractors’ responsibilities must include the following:
A. Comply with all requirements and deliverables as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment II, Article 1.0 (Operational Readiness Deliverables and
Requirements);
B. Maintain financial records and books of account on an accrual basis, in
accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), which
fully disclose the disposition of all Medi-Cal program funds received, as
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 1.2 (Financial Information);
C. Maintain a Member and Enrollment reporting systems as specified in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.1 (Management Information System),
Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal System), and Section 5.1
(Member Services);
D. Maintain data reporting capabilities sufficient to provide necessary and
timely reports to DHCS, as required by Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section
2.1 (Management Information System);
[[page 76]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 76 of 642
E. Maintain data and information exchange capabilities as needed to meet
Contractor’s obligation under the Contract and to support DHCS
administration of the Medi-Cal program through data sharing with other
trading partners. This includes, but is not limited to, Encounter Data,
Medical Record information, Network Provider and Provider information,
Member demographics, and case notes;
F. Maintain Quality Improvement activities and Population Health
Management activities. Comply with all National Committee for Quality
Assurance (NCQA) and accreditation requirements by calendar year 2026
as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.2 (Quality
Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program (QIHETP));
G. Maintain a Utilization Management (UM) program, as described in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Section 2.3 (Utilization Management Program);
H. Maintain Network adequacy as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Section 5.2 (Network and Access to Care);
I. Comply with requirements, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Section 3.2 (Provider Relations);
J. Maintain claims processing capabilities as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 3.3 (Provider Compensation Arrangements);
K. Maintain adequate access and availability of Primary Care Providers
(PCP) and Specialists for all Medically Necessary Covered Services for
Members, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.2 (Network
and Access to Care);
L. Form a Community Advisory Committee (CAC) and meet expectations, as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.2 (Network and Access to
Care), including CAC’s active participation in addressing Quality of Care,
Health Equity, Health Disparities, Population Health Management,
Children services, and other ongoing Contractor functions;
M. Provide or arrange for all Medically Necessary Covered Services for
Members, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.3 (Scope of
Services), Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.4 (Community Based Adult
Services ), and Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.5 (Mental Health and
Substance Use Disorder Benefits);
N. Provide Care Coordination, including but not limited to all Medically
Necessary services delivered both within and outside Contractor’s
Network, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.3 (Population
Health Management and Coordination of Care);
[[page 77]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 77 of 642
O. Negotiate in good faith and execute Network Provider Agreements,
Subcontractor Agreements, or Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs),
as appropriate, with third party entities, including county programs, and
local health jurisdictions covered by this Contract, as described in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local Government Agencies,
County Programs, and Third Parties) and Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 3.1.9 (Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Local
Health Departments);
P. Comply with the requirements described in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Section 5.1 (Member Services);
Q. Maintain Member Grievance procedures, as specified in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal System);
R. Develop training and certification for Marketing activity, if Contractor
conducts Marketing, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.1
(Marketing);
S. Cooperate with the DHCS Enrollment program, as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 4.2 (Enrollments and Disenrollments); and
T. Comply with all requirements and deliverables, as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Article 7.0 (Operations Deliverables and Requirements).
1.1.10 Member Representation
Contractor must ensure that Medi-Cal Members, including Seniors and Persons
with Disabilities (SPD), persons with chronic conditions (such as asthma,
diabetes, congestive heart failure), Limited English Proficient (LEP) Members,
and Members from diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds or their
representatives are included and invited to participate in establishing public
policy within Contractor’s advisory committee and CAC, as specified in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11.E. (Cultural and Linguistic Programs and
Committees), or other similar committees or groups.
1.1.11 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Training
Contractor must ensure that all staff who interact with, or may potentially interact
with, Members and any other staff deemed appropriate by Contractor or DHCS,
receive annual sensitivity, diversity, communication skills, and cultural
competency/humility training as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
5.2.11.C. (Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees).
[[page 78]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 78 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
1.2 Financial Information
1.2.1 Financial Viability and Standards Compliance
1.2.2 Contractor’s Financial Reporting Obligations
1.2.3 Independent Financial Audit Reports
1.2.4 Cooperation with DHCS’ Financial Audits
1.2.5 Medical Loss Ratio
1.2.6 Contractor’s Obligations
1.2.7 Community Reinvestment Plan and Report
[[page 79]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 79 of 642
1.2 Financial Information
1.2.1 Financial Viability and Standards Compliance
Contractor must meet and maintain financial viability and standards compliance
to DHCS’ satisfaction for each of the following elements:
A. Tangible Net Equity (TNE).
Contractor at all times must be in compliance with the TNE requirements
set forth in 28 California Code of Regulations (CCR) section 1300.76,
even in circumstances where Contractor is not otherwise legally required
to comply with this provision.
B. Administrative Costs.
Contractor’s Administrative Costs must comply with the standards set forth
in 22 CCR section 53864(b) and 28 CCR section 1300.78.
C. Standards of organization and financial soundness.
Contractor must maintain an organizational structure sufficient to conduct
the operations required by this Contract and ensure that its financial
resources are sufficient for sound business operations in accordance with
28 CCR sections 1300.67, 1300.67.3, 1300.75.1, 1300.75.4.1, 1300.76.3,
1300.77.1, 1300.77.2, 1300.77.3, and 1300.77.4.
D. Working Capital Ratio of one of the following:
1) Contractor must maintain a Working Capital Ratio of current assets
to current liabilities of at least 1:1 in accordance with Health &
Safety Code (H&S) section 1375.4(b)(1)(A)(iv); or
2) Contractor must demonstrate to DHCS that Contractor is meeting
financial obligations on a timely basis and has been doing so for at
least the preceding two years; or
3) Contractor must provide evidence that sufficient noncurrent assets,
which are readily convertible to cash, are available to achieve an
equivalent Working Capital Ratio of 1:1, if the noncurrent assets are
considered current.
E. In the event DHCS finds Contractor non-compliant with any of the
elements or obligations set forth in this provision, DHCS may impose a
Corrective Action plan or sanctions in accordance with Exhibit E (Program
Terms and Conditions) and Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I) section
[[page 80]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 80 of 642
14197.7, as set forth in in All Plan Letter (APL) 23-012. See Exhibit E,
Section 1.19 (Sanctions).
1.2.2 Contractor’s Financial Reporting Obligations
A. Form and Standards for Financial Reporting
Contractor must provide financial information and reports, including but
not limited to Financial Statements, to DHCS in the form and manner
specified by DHCS. Unless otherwise specified by DHCS, Contractor must
prepare all financial information requested by DHCS in accordance with
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and the 1989 Health
Maintenance Organization (HMO) Financial Report of Affairs and
Conditions format. Any Department of Managed Health Care (DMHC)
required reports must be prepared in DMHC-required financial reporting
format, and in accordance with 28 CCR section 1300.84. Information
submitted by Contractor must be based on current operations. Where
appropriate, reference has been made to the Knox-Keene Health Care
Service Plan Act of 1975 (KKA) rules found under 28 CCR sections
1300.51 et seq.
Unless otherwise specified by DHCS, all Financial Statements must
include, at a minimum, the following reports/schedules unless explicitly
excluded in this Attachment:
1) Jurat;
2) Report 1A and 1B: Balance Sheet;
3) Report 2: Statement of Contract Revenue, Expenses, and Net
Worth;
4) Statement of Cash Flow, prepared in accordance with Financial
Accounting Standards Board Statement Number 95 in lieu of
Report 3: Statement of Changes in Financial Position for GAAP
compliance;
5) Report 4: Enrollment and Utilization Table;
6) Schedule G: Unpaid Claims Analysis;
7) Appropriate footnote disclosures in accordance with GAAP; and
8) Schedule H: Aging of All Claims.
In addition, Contractor must prepare and submit a stand-alone Medi-Cal
line of business income statement and Enrollment table on each financial
[[page 81]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 81 of 642
reporting period required. Contractor must prepare this income statement
and Enrollment table in the DMHC required financial reporting format for
each specific county or rating region of operation, as specified by DHCS
and must include, at a minimum, the following reports/schedules:
1) Report 2: Statement of Contract Revenue and Expenses; and
2) Report 4: Enrollment and Utilization Table by County/Rating
Region.
Medi-Cal line of business Financial Statements are to include expenses,
Contract Revenues, and Enrollment only for Medi-Cal Members enrolled
through direct contract with DHCS.
Contactor must submit the Medi-Cal line of business Financial Statements
within the same timeframe as indicated for each required Financial
Statement.
B. Monthly Reporting Obligations
Contractor must submit to DHCS, no later than 30 calendar days after the
close of Contractor’s fiscal month, an exact copy of any reports required
be filed in accordance with 28 CCR section 1300.84.3.
C. Quarterly Reporting Obligations
Contractor must submit to DHCS, no later than 45 calendar days after the
close of Contractor’s fiscal quarter, an exact copy of any reports required
to be filed in accordance with 28 CCR section 1300.84.2.
D. Annual Reporting Obligations
Contractor must prepare and submit to DHCS, no later than 120 calendar
days after the close of Contractor’s Fiscal Year, an exact copy of any
reports required to be filed in accordance with 28 CCR section
1300.84.06. Contractor must also submit Medi-Cal line of business
Financial Statements no later than 120 calendar days of after the close of
the applicable Rating Period.
E. Annual Forecasts
Contractor must submit to DHCS annual forecasts of Contractor’s next
Fiscal Year no later than 60 calendar days prior to the beginning each
Fiscal Year. Contractor’s annual forecast must be prepared using DMHC
required financial reporting forms and must include, at a minimum, the
following reports/schedules:
[[page 82]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 82 of 642
1) Report 2: Statement of Contract Revenue and Expenses (Medi-Cal
line-of-business);
2) Report 4: Enrollment and Utilization Table by County/Rating Region
(Medi-Cal line-of-business);
3) TNE (All lines of business); and
4) A detailed explanation of all underlying assumptions used to
develop the forecast.
F. Publication of Financial Reports
Financial Reports submitted in accordance with this Section 1.2 are public
records and may be made public by DHCS.
1.2.3 Independent Financial Audit Reports
Contractor must ensure that an annual audit is performed by an independent
Certified Public Accountant in accordance with 42 Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) section 438.3(m) and W&I section 14459. Except as indicated in
Paragraph B of this provision, a copy of the resulting independent financial audit
report must be submitted to DHCS no later than 120 calendar days after the
close of Contractor’s Fiscal Year.
When the delivery of care or other services is dependent upon Affiliates of
Contractor, Contractor must submit combined, annual Financial Statements that
reflect the financial position of Contractor’s overall health care delivery system in
accordance with 28 CCR section 1300.84(c). Such combined, annual Financial
Statements must be presented in a form that clearly shows the financial position
of Contractor separately from the combined totals set forth in the combined
Financial Statements. Intra-entity or related party transactions and profits must
be eliminated if consolidated Financial Statements are prepared and submitted
by Contractor. Contractor also must submit to DHCS any financial audit
conducted by DMHC pursuant to H&S section 1382 within 30 calendar days of
Contractor’s receipt thereof.
In the event that Contractor’s retained independent Certified Public Accountant
determines that preparation of combined, annual Financial Statements is
inappropriate or impracticable under the circumstances, separate certified
Financial Statements must be prepared for each entity involved in the delivery of
health care services by Contractor, and such separate, annual Financial
Statements must be submitted to DHCS, along with the following:
[[page 83]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 83 of 642
A. Contractor must provide the independent Certified Public Accountant’s
written statement of the reasons for not preparing combined Financial
Statements;
B. Contractor must provide supplemental schedules that clearly reflect all
intra-entity or related party transactions and eliminations necessary to
enable DHCS to analyze the overall financial position of Contractor’s
entire health care delivery system. If Contractor is a public entity or a
political subdivision of the State and a county grand jury conducts
Contractor’s financial audits, Contractor must submit its Financial
Statements within 180 calendar days after the close of Contractor’s Fiscal
Year in accordance with H&S section 1384;
C. Contractor must authorize its independent Certified Public Accountant to
allow DHCS’ designated representatives or agents, upon written request,
to inspect any and all working papers related to the preparation of the
audit report;
D. Contractor must submit to DHCS all financial reports relevant to Affiliates
as specified in 28 CCR section 1300.84(c); and
E. Contractor must submit to DHCS copies of any financial reports submitted
to any other public or private organization within ten calendar days of
submission to such other public or private organization.
1.2.4 Cooperation with DHCS’ Financial Audits
DHCS must conduct, or contract for the conduct of, periodic audits of the
accuracy, truthfulness, and completeness of the financial data submitted by, or
on behalf of, Contractor in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.602(e).
Contractor must cooperate with these audits and provide all information and
materials requested by DHCS, or its contracted auditor, for this purpose. Please
see Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.1 (Management Information System) for
related requirements.
1.2.5 Medical Loss Ratio
Contractor must annually report a Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) as described in this
provision and in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.8. Contractor must impose
equivalent MLR reporting requirements on Fully Delegated Subcontractors,
Partially Delegated Subcontractors, Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractors, and Downstream Partially Delegated Subcontractors.
A. Contractor must calculate and report a MLR as stated in 42 CFR sections
438.8 and 438.604(a)(3) in a form and manner specified by DHCS.
[[page 84]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 84 of 642
1) Contractor must ensure that revenues, expenditures, and other
amounts are appropriately identified and classified including by
distinguishing which amounts were actually paid for benefits, or
activities that improve health care quality, and which amounts were
actually paid for administrative services, taxes, or other activities in
accordance with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS) Informational Bulletin published May 15, 2019, with the
subject “Medical Loss Ratio Requirements Related to Third-Party
Vendors.”
2) Contractor must, in compliance with 42 CFR section 438.230(c)(1)
and California Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) Terms
and Conditions, in particular Paragraph 11 of the 1915(b) Waiver
STCs, require all applicable Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors to comply with the MLR reporting responsibilities in
this Section, including the requirement to distinguish which
amounts are actually paid for benefits or activities that improve
health care quality, and which amounts were actually paid for
administrative services, taxes, or other activities in accordance with
the CMS Informational Bulletin published May 15, 2019 with the
subject “Medical Loss Ratio Requirements Related to Third-Party
Vendors.” Payments to a Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor that are not the amount actually paid to a Provider or
supplier for furnishing Covered Services must not be included in
incurred claims.
B. The MLR experienced by Contractor in a MLR reporting year is the ratio of
the numerator, as stated in Paragraph E of this Section, to the
denominator, as stated in Paragraph F of this Section. A MLR may be
increased by a credibility adjustment in accordance with Paragraph HH of
this provision.
C. DHCS utilizes a materiality threshold for determining whether Fully
Delegated Subcontractors, Partially Delegated Subcontractors,
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors, and Downstream Partially
Delegated Subcontractors are subject to the reporting and remittance
requirements. The materiality threshold may be based on one or more of
the following:
1) A nnual Medi-Cal revenue;
2) T he Medi-Cal lives for which risk is delegated;
3) T he scope of Medi-Cal services for which risk is delegated; or
[[page 85]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 85 of 642
4) Other factors.
D. Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors that fall below the
materiality threshold for an MLR reporting year, as specified by DHCS, are
not subject to MLR reporting for that MLR reporting year. DHCS reserves
the right to reestablish the threshold annually, may require reporting by
certain Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors regardless of
materiality, and will communicate details of the materiality threshold and
subsequent updates and/or changes through APLs or other instruction.
E. The numerator of Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream
Subcontractors’ MLR for a MLR reporting year is the sum of Contractor’s,
Subcontractors’, and Downstream Subcontractors’ incurred claims,
expenditures for activities that improve health care quality, and Fraud
prevention activities.
1) Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream Subcontractors’
Incurred Claims
a) Incurred claims must include the following:
i. Direct claims that Contractor, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors, as applicable, paid to
Providers, including under capitated contracts with
Network Providers, for Covered Services or supplies
under this Contract, a Subcontractor Agreement, or a
Downstream Subcontractor Agreement, as applicable,
and meeting the requirements of 42 CFR section
438.3(e);
ii. Unpaid claims liabilities for the MLR reporting year,
including claims reported that are in the process of
being adjusted or claims Incurred but Not Reported;
iii. Withholds from payments made to Network Providers;
iv. Claims that are recoverable for anticipated
coordination of benefits;
v. Claims payments recoveries received due to
subrogation;
vi. Incurred but Not Reported claims based on past
experience, and modified to reflect current conditions,
[[page 86]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 86 of 642
such as changes in exposure or claim frequency or
severity;
vii. Changes in other claims-related reserves; and
viii. Reserves for contingent benefits and the medical
claim portion of lawsuits.
b) Amounts that must be deducted from incurred claims include
the following:
i. Identified unrecovered Overpayments and
Overpayment recoveries received from Network
Providers;
ii. Prescription Drug rebates received and accrued; and
iii. Amounts received as remittances from
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors, as
applicable, in accordance with Paragraph P of this
provision and Exhibit B of this Contract.
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors
must deduct amounts received as remittances from
their downstream entities. The contracts between all
downstream entities in Contractor’s delegation
arrangement must include this reference.
c) Expenditures that must be included in incurred claims
include the following:
i. The amount of incentive and bonus payments made,
or expected to be made, to Network Providers that
are tied to clearly-defined, objectively measurable,
and well-documented clinical or quality improvement
standards that apply to Providers; and
ii. The amount of claims payments recovered through
Fraud reduction efforts, not to exceed the amount of
Fraud reduction expenses. The amount of Fraud
reduction expenses must not include activities
specified in E.2.c of this provision.
iii. The amount of payments made to providers under
Directed Payment Initiatives.
[[page 87]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 87 of 642
d) Amounts that must either be included in or deducted from
incurred claims include, respectively, net payments or
receipts related to solvency funds mandated by DHCS.
e) The following amounts must be excluded from incurred
claims.
i. Non-claims costs, which include:
(1) the amounts paid to third-party vendors for
secondary network savings;
(2) amounts paid to third-party vendors for network
development, administrative fees, claims
processing, and Utilization Management (UM);
(3) amounts paid for professional or administrative
services, including amounts paid to a Provider,
that do not represent compensation or
reimbursement for California Medicaid State
Plan services or services defined in 42 CFR
section 438.3(e) and provided to Members;
and
(4) amounts paid for fines and penalties assessed
by regulatory authorities; and
ii. Amounts paid to DHCS as remittances in accordance
with Paragraph P of this provision and Exhibit B of
this Contract; and
iii. Amounts paid to upstream entities as remittance in
accordance with Paragraph P of this Subsection. The
contracts between all downstream entities in
Contractor’s delegation arrangement must include this
reference; and
iv. Amounts paid to Network Providers under 42 CFR
section 438.6(d).
f) Incurred claims paid by an entity that is later assumed by
another entity must be reported by the assuming entity for
the entire MLR reporting year and no incurred claims for that
MLR reporting year may be reported by the ceding entity.
[[page 88]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 88 of 642
2) Activities that improve health care quality must be in one of the
following categories:
a) Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream
Subcontractors’, as applicable, activity that meets the
requirements of 45 CFR section 158.150 (a) and (b) and is
not excluded under 45 CFR section 158.150(c);
b) Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream
Subcontractors’, as applicable, activity related to any
External Quality Review-related activity as described in 42
CFR sections 438.358(b) and (c); or
c) Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream
Subcontractors’, as applicable, expenditure that is related to
Health Information Technology (HIT) and meaningful use,
meets the requirements placed on issuers set forth in 45
CFR section 158.151, and is not considered incurred claims,
as defined in this Subsection.
3) Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream Subcontractors’, as
applicable, expenditures on activities related to Fraud prevention as
described in 45 CFR part 158, and not including expenses for
Fraud reduction efforts as stated in Paragraph E.1.c.ii of this
Subsection.
F. The denominator of Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream
Subcontractors’ MLR for a MLR reporting year must equal the adjusted
premium revenue for Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream
Subcontractors’ Medi-Cal line of business. The adjusted premium revenue
is Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream Subcontractors’
premium revenue minus Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, and Downstream
Subcontractors’ federal, State, and local taxes and licensing and
regulatory fees, and is aggregated in accordance with this Subsection.
1) Premium revenue includes the following for the MLR reporting year:
a) Capitation Payments, developed in accordance with 42 CFR
section 438.4, and excluding payments made per 42 CFR
section 438.6(d);
b) One-time payments for Member life events as specified in
this Contract, including, but not limited to, Supplemental
Payments and Additional Payments as set forth in provisions
1.7 and 1.8 of Exhibit B, respectively;
[[page 89]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 89 of 642
c) Other payments to Contractor approved under 42 CFR
section 438.6(b)(3);
d) All changes to unearned premium reserves; and
e) Net payments or receipts related to Risk Sharing
Mechanisms developed in accordance with 42 CFR sections
438.5 or 438.6.
f) Payments to Contractor for expenditures under Directed
Payment Initiatives.
g) Notwithstanding (a)-(c), for Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors, premium revenue includes all payments
received pursuant to a Subcontractor Agreement or
Downstream Subcontractor Agreement, excluding payments
received in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.6(d).
2) Taxes, licensing, and regulatory fees for the MLR reporting year
must include:
a) Statutory assessments to defray the operating expenses of
any State or federal department;
b) Examination fees in lieu of premium taxes as specified by
State law;
c) Federal taxes and assessments allocated to Contractor,
Subcontractors, or Downstream Subcontractors, as
applicable, excluding federal income taxes on investment
income, capital gains, and federal employment taxes;
d) State and local taxes and assessments including:
i. Any industry-wide or subset assessments, other than
surcharges on specific claims, paid to the State or a
locality directly.
ii. Guaranty fund assessments.
iii. Assessments of State or local industrial boards or
other boards for operating expenses, or for benefits to
sick employed persons in connection with disability
benefit laws or similar taxes levied by the State.
iv. State or local income, excise, and business taxes,
[[page 90]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 90 of 642
other than premium taxes and State employment and
similar taxes and assessments.
v. State or local premium taxes, plus State or local taxes
based on reserves, if in lieu of premium taxes.
e) Payments made by Contractor, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors, as applicable, that are
otherwise exempt from federal income taxes, for community
benefit expenditures as defined in 45 CFR section
158.162(c), limited to the higher of either:
i. 3 percent of earned premium; or
ii. The highest premium tax rate in the State, multiplied
by Contractor’s, Subcontractors’, or Downstream
Subcontractors’, as applicable, earned premium in the
State.
3) If Contractor, or any Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor,
is later assumed by another entity that becomes the new
Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor under this
Contract, a Subcontractor Agreement, or a Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement, the new Contractor, Subcontractor, or
Downstream Subcontractors must report the total amount of the
denominator for the entire MLR reporting year, and no amount
under this Paragraph for that year may be reported by the ceding
Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor.
G. In the allocation of expense, Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors must include each expense under only one type of
expense, unless a portion of the expense fits under the definition of, or
criteria for, one type of expense and the remainder fits into a different type
of expense, in which case the expense must be pro-rated between types
of expenses. Expenditures that benefit multiple contracts or populations,
or contracts other than those being reported, must be reported on a pro
rata basis. Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors
must use the following methods to allocate expenses:
1) Allocation to each category must be based on a Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) method that is expected to
yield the most accurate results;
2) Shared expenses, including expenses under the terms of a
management contract, must be apportioned pro rata to the contract
incurring the expense; and
[[page 91]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 91 of 642
3) Expenses that relate solely to the operation of a reporting entity,
such as staff costs associated with the adjusting and paying of
claims, must be borne solely by the reporting entity and are not to
be apportioned to the other entities.
H. Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors may add a
credibility adjustment to a calculated MLR if the MLR reporting year
experience is partially credible to account for a difference between the
actual and target MLRs that may be due to random statistical variation.
The credibility adjustment is added to the reported MLR calculation before
calculating any remittance.
1) Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors may
not add a credibility adjustment to a calculated MLR if the MLR
reporting year experience is fully credible.
2) If Contractor’s, Subcontractors, or Downstream Subcontractor’s
experience is Non-Credible, it is presumed to meet or exceed the
MLR calculation standards in this Subsection.
3) Non-credible and partially-credible Contractors, Subcontractors,
and Downstream Subcontractors that meet the materiality threshold
must submit an MLR report regardless of credibility.
4) Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors must
fulfill these requirements by using the base credibility factors that
CMS publishes in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.8(h)(4).
5) Contractor must submit a MLR report regardless of credibility.
DHCS may require MLR reporting by certain Subcontractors or
Downstream Subcontractors regardless of credibility.
I. Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors must
aggregate data by Member groups as defined in this Contract, or as
otherwise directed by DHCS. This may require separate reporting and
MLR calculations for specific populations.
J. Contractor must report its MLR to DHCS by county or rating region.
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors must report their MLR at
the Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor arrangement level, by
county or rating region, to their upstream entity.
K. MLR Reporting requirements.
[[page 92]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 92 of 642
1) Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors must
submit a report to DHCS that includes at least the following
information for each MLR reporting year:
a) Total incurred claims;
b) Expenditures on Quality Improvement activities;
c) Expenditures related to activities compliant with 42 CFR
sections 438.608(a) – (5), (7), (8), and (b);
d) Non-claims costs;
e) Premium revenue;
f) Taxes, licensing, and regulatory fees;
g) Methodology(ies) for allocation of expenditures, which must
include a detailed description of the methods used to
allocate expenses, including incurred claims, quality
improvement expenses, federal and State taxes and
licensing or regulatory fees, and other non-claims costs, as
described in 45 CFR section 158.170(b);
h) Any credibility adjustment applied;
i) The calculated MLR;
j) Any remittance owed to DHCS, if applicable;
k) A comparison of the information reported with the audited
financial report required under 42 CFR section 438.3(m);
l) A description of the method used to aggregate data; and
m) The number of Member months.
2) Contractor must submit this report in a timeframe and manner
determined by DHCS, but no longer than 12 months after the end
of the MLR reporting year.
3) Contractor must require any Subcontractor or other third-party
vendor providing claims adjudication activities to provide all
underlying data associated with MLR reporting to Contractor within
180 calendar days from the end of the MLR reporting year, or within
30 calendar days of being requested by Contractor, whichever is
[[page 93]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 93 of 642
sooner, regardless of current contracting limitations, to calculate
and validate the accuracy of MLR reporting.
4) Contractor must require Subcontractors impose reporting
requirements equivalent to the information required in 42 CFR
section 438.8(k) on Downstream Subcontractors who accept
financial risk to perform delegated activities and reporting
responsibilities specific for those services they do not directly
provide to Members, in accordance with 42 CFR section
438.230(c)(1). Subcontractors must comply with all applicable
Medi-Cal laws and regulations, including applicable sub-regulatory
guidance and provisions of this Contract, in accordance with 42
CFR section 438.230(c)(2).
5) Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors must
attest to the accuracy of the MLR calculation in accordance with
requirements of this provision when submitting the MLR report.
6) Contractor must ensure Subcontractor submissions are in
accordance with the information required in 42 CFR section
438.8(k). Contractor is expected to review and provide oversight of
Subcontractor MLR submissions. Specific expectations include, but
are not to be limited to:
a) Review of each applicable Subcontractor’s MLR and
reported medical cost per Member per month to identify and
investigate outliers;
b) Review of reported expenses to ensure medical and non-
medical expenses are appropriately accounted for in the
MLR calculation;
c) Verification that reported expenses align with service volume
reported in encounters;
d) Verification that reported revenues align with the upstream
entities’ reported payments;
e) Review of the reasonableness of methodologies for
allocation of expenditures across multiple lines of business;
f) Review of the reasonableness of IBNR estimates.
Contractor will impose the aforementioned review and oversight
expectations on Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors, as
applicable, for their downstream entities. The contracts between all
[[page 94]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 94 of 642
downstream entities in Contractor’s delegation arrangement must include
a reference to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.K.4 and 6
(Medical Loss Ratio).
L. Contractor may be excluded from the reporting requirements in this
provision in the first MLR reporting year of its operation. Contractor then
must comply with these requirements beginning with the next MLR
reporting year in which it contracts with DHCS, even if the first MLR
reporting year was not a full 12 months.
M. Consistent with 42 CFR section 438.8(l), Contractor may exempt newly
contracted Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors from the MLR
reporting requirements in the Subcontractor’s or Downstream
Subcontractor’s first MLR reporting year of its operation. Contractor then
must require Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors to comply
with the MLR reporting year requirements in the next reporting year even if
the first MLR reporting year did not cover a full 12 months of operation.
1) Contractors must report any excluded Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors to DHCS by the end of the third
quarter of that MLR reporting year utilizing DHCS’ reporting form.
2) DHCS retains the discretion to reverse any exemption based on
information obtained during the initial review of MLR reporting
and/or subsequent State or federal reviews or audits. Contractor
must comply, and must require their Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors to comply, with any such reversal and
submit or amend MLR reporting as needed.
N. In any instance where DHCS makes a retroactive change to the Capitation
Payments for a MLR reporting year and the MLR report has already been
submitted to DHCS, Contractor must re-calculate the MLR for all MLR
reporting years affected by the change and submit a new report meeting
the reporting requirements in this Subsection.
O. Contractor must impose the above retroactive reporting requirements on
its Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors where DHCS makes
a retroactive change to the Capitation Payments for a MLR reporting year
and the MLR report has already been submitted to Contractor or upstream
Subcontractor. In its sole discretion, DHCS reserves the right to limit MLR
re-reporting for Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors to no
more than one instance and may require re-reporting on an ad hoc basis.
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors must not re-report a
MLR more than once for any MLR reporting year absent DHCS’ review
and express permission for any such MLR re-reporting. DHCS has the
[[page 95]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 95 of 642
sole authority and discretion to grant or deny permission to any request for
a Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor to re-report more than
once for any MLR reporting year. The contracts between all downstream
entities in Contractor’s delegation arrangement must include this
reference.
P. Contractor must, if applicable, provide a remittance for a MLR reporting
year in accordance with W&I section 14197.2(c)(1) and Exhibit B of this
Contract. Starting January 1, 2025, Contractor must impose equivalent
remittance requirements on Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors.
Q. In accordance with the CalAIM 1915(b) Waiver STCs, DHCS will work with
CMS to effectuate an audit of MLR reports no sooner than the 2028
calendar year. The MLR audit will include the time period covered by the
CalAIM 1915(b) Waiver (January 1, 2022 through December 31, 2026).
1) To allow DHCS and CMS to complete an accurate audit of the MLR
reports, Contractors, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors must maintain all records and documents relating to
MLR reports for a minimum of 10 years as described in 42 CFR
section 438.3(u).
2) Pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.3(h), DHCS and its contractor(s)
may, at any time, request, inspect, and audit any of Contractor’s,
Subcontractors’, and Downstream Subcontractors’ records or
documents. Record retention requirements are also referenced in
Exhibit E of this Contract.
1.2.6 Contractor’s Obligations
A. Contractor is required to provide any other financial reports, data, or
information not listed above as requested by DHCS to evaluate or monitor
Contractor’s financial condition.
B. If Contractor’s incurred claims reported in accordance with Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5, Paragraph C.1.a.iii above includes
withholds from payments made to Network Providers, Contractor must
provide to DHCS a report, in a form and manner specified by DHCS,
detailing the basis for those withholds.
1.2.7 Community Reinvestment Plan and Report
A. Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors must annually submit a Community
Reinvestment Plan for DHCS’ approval that details its anticipated
[[page 96]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 96 of 642
community reinvestment activities, pursuant to Exhibit B, Section 1.17
(Community Reinvestment), in a form and manner specified by DHCS
through APLs or similar guidance. The Community Reinvestment Plan
must detail the expected Members of Contractor’s community
reinvestment, how they will benefit, and any additional information
requested by DHCS. DHCS will make available the parameters for
allowable community reinvestment activities through APLs or similar
guidance.
B. If Contractor has a Fully Delegated Subcontractor or Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractor, Contractor must require the Fully Delegated
Subcontractor and Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor to annually
submit a Community Reinvestment Plan for approval that details its
anticipated community reinvestment activities, pursuant to Exhibit B,
Section, 1.17 (Community Reinvestment), in a form and manner specified
by DHCS through APLs or similar guidance. Contractor must submit the
Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s and Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractor’s Community Reinvestment Plan to DHCS.
C. Contractor must annually submit a Community Reinvestment Report,
including information related to any Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s or
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s Community Reinvestment
Plan, to DHCS in a form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or
similar guidance. The Community Reinvestment Report must detail
Contractor’s community reinvestment activities in accordance with the
Community Reinvestment Plan, and the outcomes thereof. DHCS will
make available the minimum information requirements for the report
through APLs or similar guidance.
[[page 97]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 97 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
1.3 Program Integrity and Compliance Program
1.3.1 Compliance Program
1.3.2 Fraud Prevention Program
1.3.3 Provider Screening, Enrolling, and Credentialing/Recredentialing
1.3.4 Contractor’s Obligations Regarding Suspended, Excluded, and Ineligible
Providers
1.3.5 Disclosures
1.3.6 Treatment of Overpayment Recoveries
1.3.7 Federal False Claims Act Compliance and Support
[[page 98]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 98 of 642
1.3 Program Integrity and Compliance Program
Contractor must establish administrative and management policies and
procedures which are designed to prevent and detect Fraud, Waste, and Abuse.
In furtherance of this goal, Contractor must establish a Compliance program, a
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse prevention program, and other program integrity
processes, as set forth in this Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 1.3 (Program
Integrity and Compliance Program). In establishing these policies, procedures,
and programs, Contractor must meet the requirements of 42 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) section 438.608.
While Contractor may contract with entities to support Contractor on compliance
activities (such as training and auditing), Contractor may not delegate program
integrity and compliance program functions to Subcontractors or Downstream
Subcontractors.
Contractors must ensure that all Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors also have a robust program integrity and compliance program in
place. This requirement may be fulfilled by Contractor maintaining all program
integrity and compliance program functions on behalf of Subcontractor or
Downstream Subcontractor.
1.3.1 Compliance Program
Contractor must have a compliance program that includes, at a minimum, the
following elements:
A. A compliance plan which:
1) Outlines the key elements of the compliance program;
2) Includes reference to the standards of conduct or code of conduct;
3) Allows the compliance program to act independently of operational
and program areas without fear of repercussions for uncovering
deficiencies or noncompliance;
4) Details how it will implement and maintain elements of the
compliance program;
5) Includes the compliance reporting structure and positions of key
personnel involved in ensuring compliance, including the
compliance officer;
6) References the delegation reporting and compliance plan
[[page 99]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 99 of 642
7) References policies and procedures operationalizing the
compliance program;
8) Is reviewed and approved by the board of director’s compliance
and oversight committee routinely, but not less than annually; and
9) Is publicly posted on Contractor’s website.
B. Standard of conduct or code of conduct must clearly articulate
Contractor’s commitment to comply with all applicable requirements and
standards under this Contract, and all applicable federal and State
requirements. It must describe the organizational expectations that all
employees, officers, board of directors, Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Contractors act ethically and have a
responsibility in ensuring compliance. Standard of conduct must be
approved by Contractor’s full board of directors annually.
C. Written policies and procedures which address the following:
1) Detail how elements of the compliance program are
operationalized, including the titles of persons responsible for
specific activities;
2) Describe how Contractor will oversee all Network Providers,
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and third-party
entities compliance with all applicable terms and conditions of the
Contract. See also, Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.4
(Contractor’s Duty to Ensure Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, and Network Provider Compliance); and
3) Outline Contractor’s process to ensure policies and procedures are
reviewed at least annually and how changes are disseminated to
impacted operational areas. Contractor must update the policies
and procedures to incorporate changes in applicable laws,
regulations, and requirements.
D. A delegation reporting and compliance plan as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.3 (Contractor’s Duty to Disclose All
Delegated Relationships and to Submit Delegation Reporting and
Compliance Plan) and Exhibit J (Delegation Reporting and Compliance
Plan);
E. The designation of a compliance officer who is responsible for developing,
implementing, and ensuring compliance with the requirements and
standards under the Contract and who reports directly to the chief
executive officer and the board of directors. Contractor’s policies and
[[page 100]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 100 of 642
procedures must include the criteria for selecting a compliance officer and
a job description, including responsibilities and the authority of this
position. The compliance officer must be a full-time employee and must be
independent, which means they must not serve in both a compliance and
operational role, for example, when the compliance officer is the chief
operating officer, finance officer or general counsel.
F. The establishment of a regulatory compliance and oversight committee of
the board of directors and at the senior management level charged with
overseeing Contractor’s compliance program and compliance with the
requirements under this Contract. Contractor’s policies and procedures
must include the criteria for selecting members to the committee. The
committee must review the compliance plan on an annual basis. The
committee must meet at least quarterly to oversee the compliance
program, including, reviewing areas of non-compliance and
implementation and monitoring of corrective actions.
G. A system for training and educating the compliance officer, senior
management, and employees on federal and State standards and
requirements of this Contract. Trainings must address Contractor’s
standards of conduct, compliance plan, and compliance policies and
procedures compliance training completion must be verified such as
through a certification or attestation upon training completion and review
of the standard of conduct, compliance program, and compliance policies
and procedures. Contractor must ensure that training for the compliance
officer, senior management, and employees on the compliance program is
completed within 90 days of employment and annually thereafter.
H. A system for board members, officers, senior management, and
employees to receive training on policies and procedures related to
compliance for specific job functions including but not limited to:
1) Compliance officer, senior management, and employees training
and education on the overall compliance program, Fraud, Waste,
and Abuse, and code of conduct in accordance with Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 1.3 (Program Integrity and Compliance
Plan);
2) Network Providers completion of required initial and ongoing
Network Provider training within the established timeframes in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.2.5
(Network Provider Training), Members’ rights as required under
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 3.2 (Provider Relations), and
Advanced Directives in accordance with 42 CFR sections 422.128
and 438.3(j) set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.1
(Members Rights and Responsibilities);
[[page 101]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 101 of 642
3) Member Services staff completion of required training as set forth in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.2 (Member Services Staff)
and include diversity, equity and inclusion training in accordance
with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11.C. (Cultural and
Linguistic Programs and Committees); and
4) For staff carrying out obligations under MOUs, the training required
under Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local
Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third Parties)
I. Effective lines of communication between the compliance officer and
employees. For example, Contractor must establish a consistent process
for distributing and communicating new regulations, regulatory changes,
or changes relevant to this Contract. Contractor will communicate this
process to all Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers, as applicable. Lines of communication must be accessible to all
employees, and include a mechanism to enable anonymous and
confidential good faith reporting of potential compliance issues by any
employee, Member, Network Provider, Subcontractor, or other person or
entity, as they are identified.
J. Enforcement of standards through well-publicized disciplinary guidelines.
This includes, but is not limited to:
1) Establishment and implementation of disciplinary policies and
procedures that reflect clear and specific disciplinary standards as
well as Contractor’s expectation for reporting of issues related to
noncompliance or illegality; training expectations and disciplinary or
enforcement standards when noncompliant activity is found.
2) To demonstrate that disciplinary guidelines are enforced,
Contractor must maintain records of disciplinary actions for a period
of ten years years at a minimum, including date of and description
of violation, date of investigation, findings and date and description
disciplinary action.
K. Contractor must develop and maintain effective systems for routine
monitoring and auditing, and identification of compliance risks including
but not limited to:
1) Dedicated staff for routine internal monitoring and auditing of
compliance risks;
2) Methods and tools for assessing whether Contractor activities
required under this Contract comply with State and federal law and
[[page 102]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 102 of 642
this Contract. This includes having methods and tools to evaluate
and trend an activity over time to assess noncompliance;
3) Routine and periodic reporting of internal monitoring and auditing
activities and results to compliance and oversight committee of the
board; and
4) Unannounced audits of Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors to assess the compliance with requirements set
forth in this Contract as relevant to delegated functions.
L. Contractor must develop and maintain effective systems for prompt
response to compliance issues as they are raised, investigation of
potential compliance problems as identified in the course of self-evaluation
and audits, correction of such problems promptly and thoroughly (or
coordination of suspected criminal acts with law enforcement agencies) to
reduce the potential for recurrence, and ongoing compliance with the
requirements under this Contract (42 CFR section 438.608(a)).
1) This includes policies and procedures for constructing and
implementing effective Corrective Action plans, including root cause
analysis and tailoring Corrective Action plans to address specific
compliance concerns;
2) Corrective action plans must be reviewed and signed by the
compliance officer and the executive officer responsible for the area
subject to the Corrective Action plan;
To demonstrate effective systems to address compliance concerns
and implement effective corrective action, Contractor must maintain
and publicly post records of Corrective Action plans and the
rectifying actions to close out the findings, including but not limited
to, committee meeting minutes detailing discussion of corrective
action plans and description of outcomes; and
3) Contractor must ensure contractual provisions are in place through
Subcontractor Agreements and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements, as relevant, to enforce compliance with Corrective
Action plans when they are not met, such as financial sanctions,
payment withholds, or liquidated damages.
1.3.2 Fraud Prevention Program
Contractor must have a Fraud prevention program that at a minimum sets forth
policies and procedures for the elements identified in this Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 1.3.2 (Fraud Prevention Program).
[[page 103]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 103 of 642
A. Fraud Prevention Officer
Contractor must designate a Fraud prevention officer who is responsible
for developing, implementing, and ensuring compliance with Contractor’s
Fraud prevention program and who reports directly to the chief executive
officer and the board of directors. The Fraud prevention officer must
attend and participate in DHCS’ quarterly program integrity meetings, as
scheduled. The same individual may serve as both the compliance officer
and the Fraud prevention officer.
B. Notification of Changes in Member’s Circumstances
Contractor must promptly notify DHCS when Contractor receives
information about changes in a Member’s circumstances that may affect
the Member’s eligibility including changes in the Member’s residence,
income, insurance status, and death (42 CFR section 438.608(a)(3)). This
notification will be in a form and manner specified by DHCS through All
Plan Letters (APLs), or other similar instructions.
C. Method to Verify Services Received
Contractor must have a regular method to verify, by sampling or other
methods, confirming that services that have been represented to have
been delivered by Network Providers were received by Members (42 CFR
section 438.608(a)(5)). Contractor must provide proof of compliance with
this requirement when requested by DHCS, in a form and manner
specified by DHCS through APLs, or other similar instruction.
D. Contractor’s Reporting Obligations
In accordance with 42 CFR section 438.608(a)(7), Contractor must refer,
investigate, and report all Fraud, Waste, and Abuse activities that
Contractor identifies to DHCS’ Program Integrity Unit (PIU), in a manner
prescribed by PIU, as follows:
1) Preliminary Fraud, Waste, and Abuse Reports
Contractor must file a preliminary report with DHCS’ PIU detailing
any suspected Fraud, Waste, or Abuse identified by or reported to
Contractor, its Subcontractors, its Downstream Subcontractors,
and/or its Network Providers within ten Working Days of
Contractor’s discovery or notice of such Fraud, Waste, or Abuse.
Contractor must submit a preliminary report in accordance with
requirements set forth in APLs or other similar instructions.
Subsequent to the filing of the preliminary report, Contractor must
[[page 104]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 104 of 642
promptly conduct a complete investigation of all reported or
suspected Fraud, Waste, and Abuse activities.
2) Completed Investigation Report
Within ten Working Days of completing its Fraud, Waste, or Abuse
investigation (including both Contractor-initiated and DHCS-initiated
referrals), Contractor must submit a completed report to DHCS’
PIU. This report must include Contractor’s findings, actions taken,
and include all documentation necessary to support any action
taken by Contractor, and any additional documentation as
requested by DHCS or other State and federal agencies.
3) Quarterly Fraud, Waste, Abuse Status Report
Contractor must submit a quarterly report to DHCS’ PIU on all
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse investigative activities ten Working Days
after the close of every calendar quarter. The quarterly report must
contain the status of all preliminary, active, and completed
investigations and must include both Contractor-initiated and
DHCS-initiated referrals. In addition to quarterly reports, Contractor
must provide updates and available documentation as DHCS may
request from time to time.
4) Manner of Report Submission
Contractor must electronically submit each Fraud, Waste, and
Abuse report required under the Contract in a manner prescribed
by DHCS’ PIU. The required reports must include but not be limited
to the preliminary Fraud report, the completed investigation report,
and the quarterly status report, including all supporting documents,
and any additional documents requested by DHCS, in a form and
manner specified by DHCS through APLs, or other similar
instructions.
5) Contractor’s Obligation to Investigate State, federal, and other
Medi-Cal managed care plans’ Referrals of Fraud, Waste, and
Abuse.
DHCS may, from time to time, share with Contractor relevant
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse referrals received from State and federal
agencies and other Medi-Cal managed care plans. Contractor may
also receive Fraud, Waste, and Abuse referrals directly from other
federal agencies, State agencies (other than DHCS), and Medi-Cal
managed care plans.
[[page 105]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 105 of 642
Contractor must conduct a complete investigation of all Fraud,
Waste, and Abuse referrals received from DHCS, other State and
federal agencies, and other Medi-Cal managed care plans, relating
to Contractor’s Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and
Network Providers. Contractor must submit a completed
investigation report and a quarterly status report, as set forth above
in this Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.3.2.D (Contractor’s
Reporting Obligations), in connection with all DHCS, State and
federal agency, and Medi-Cal managed care plan referrals of
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse.
6) Confidentiality
Contractor acknowledges that information shared by DHCS, other
State and federal agencies, and other Medi-Cal managed care
plans in connection with any Fraud, Waste, or Abuse referral must
be considered confidential, until formal criminal proceedings are
made public. Contractor further acknowledges that it is receiving
this Confidential Information as a DHCS business associate in
order to facilitate Contractor’s contractual obligations to maintain a
Fraud, Waste, and Abuse prevention program. Contractor must
receive and maintain this Confidential Information in its capacity as
a Medi-Cal managed care plan and will use the Confidential
Information only for conducting an investigation into any potential
Fraud, Waste, or Abuse activities and in furtherance of any other
program integrity activities.
In the event Contractor is required to share this Confidential
Information with a Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or
Network Provider, Contractor must ensure that Subcontractor,
Downstream Subcontractor and Network Provider acknowledge
that such information must be kept confidential by Subcontractor,
Downstream Subcontractor, and Network Provider, and a similar
provision of confidentiality must be included in all Subcontractor
Agreements, Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, and Network
Provider Agreements.
1.3.3 Provider Screening, Enrolling, and Credentialing/Recredentialing
A. Screening and Enrolling
All Network Providers must be screened and enrolled in accordance with
this Contract, applicable State and federal law, including 42 CFR section
438.602(b), and APL 22-013.
[[page 106]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 106 of 642
1) If Contractor chooses not to utilize the State level Enrollment
pathway, Contractor must notify DHCS and send to DHCS its
policies and procedures for review and approval before conducting
its own Enrollment process.
2) Contractor may allow Network Providers to participate in their
Network for up to 120 calendar days if the Network Provider has a
pending Enrollment application in review with DHCS or with
Contractor in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.602(b)(2).
3) Contractor must terminate its contract with the provider no later
than 15 calendar days of the provider receiving notification from
DHCS that the provider has been denied Enrollment in the Medi-
Cal program, or upon the expiration of the first 120-day period.
Contractor cannot continue to contract with providers during the
period in which the provider resubmits its Enrollment application to
DHCS or Contractor and can only re-initiate a contract upon the
provider’s successful enrollment.
B. Credentialing/Recredentialing
Contractor has an on-going obligation to credential and recredential
Providers and Network Providers in accordance with this Contract (Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.13 (Credentialing and Recredentialing)),
applicable State and federal law, including 42 CFR section 438.602(b),
and APL 22-013.
1.3.4 Contractor’s Obligations Regarding Suspended, Excluded, and Ineligible
Providers
Contractor has a continuing obligation to verify that Contractor’s Network
Providers are enrolled and remain enrolled in the Medi-Cal program. Contractor
is responsible for knowledge of all ineligible Providers and individuals on these
lists.
A. Tracking Suspended, Excluded, and Ineligible Providers
Contractor must review the following exclusionary databases and lists no
less frequently than monthly and take appropriate action in accordance
with APL 15-026 and APL 21-003.
1) List of Suspended and Ineligible Providers located at
https://www.medi-cal.ca.gov;
[[page 107]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 107 of 642
2) List of excluded individuals and entities maintained by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (U.S. DHHS), Office of
Inspector General located at https://oig.hhs.gov;
3) The System of Award Management (SAM);
4) The Social Security Administration Death Master File (SSADMF);
5) To the extent applicable, National Plan and Provider Enumeration
System (NPPES); and
6) Restricted Provider Database
Contractor must notify DHCS’ PIU within ten Working Days of
removing a suspended, excluded, or ineligible Providers or
individual from its Network and confirm that the ineligible Provider is
no longer receiving payments, either directly or indirectly, in
connection with the Medi-Cal program. A suspended, excluded,
and ineligible Provider report must be sent to DHCS PIU in a
manner prescribed by DHCS’ PIU.
B. No Contracts with Excluded, Suspended, or Ineligible Providers
Contractor is prohibited from employing, paying, contracting, or
maintaining a Medi-Cal contract with Providers that are excluded,
suspended, or ineligible to participate, either directly or indirectly, in the
Medicare or Medi-Cal programs (42 CFR section 438.610(a)-(c) and APL
21-003).
C. Notification and Termination of Contracts
Contractor must promptly notify DHCS when Contractor receives
information about a change in a Network Provider's, Subcontractor’s, or
Downstream Subcontractor’s circumstances that may affect the Network
Provider's, Subcontractor’s, or Downstream Subcontractor’s eligibility to
participate in the Medi-Cal managed care program, including the
termination of their Network Provider Agreement, Subcontractor
Agreement, or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement with Contractor in
accordance with this Contract, State and federal law, including 42 CFR
section 438.608(a)(4), and APL 21-003.
D. Actions to be taken where Credible Allegation of Fraud
If DHCS, Division of Medi-Cal Fraud and Elder Abuse (DMFEA), or United
States Department of Justice (US DOJ), or any other authorized State or
federal agency, determines there is a credible allegation of Fraud against
[[page 108]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 108 of 642
Contractor’s Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or Network
Provider, Contractor must comply with this Contract, all applicable State
and federal laws, APL 15-026, and APL 21-003. Contractor must have
procedures in place to immediately suspend payments to Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and Network Providers for which a State or
federal agency determines there is a credible allegation of Fraud (42 CFR
section 438.608(a)(8)). In addition, Contractor may conduct additional
monitoring, temporarily suspend, and/or terminate the Network Provider,
Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor.
1.3.5 Disclosures
In accordance with 42 CFR section 438.608(c), Contractor, its Subcontractors,
and its Downstream Subcontractors must:
A. Provide written disclosure of any prohibited affiliation under 42 CFR
section 438.610; and
B. Provide written disclosures of information on ownership and control as
required under 42 CFR section 455.104.
C. Report and return any payment to DHCS within 60 calendar days of when
it has identified any Capitation Payments or other payments it has
received or paid in excess of the amounts specified in this Contract.
1.3.6 Treatment of Overpayment Recoveries
A. Retention, Reporting, and Payment of Recoveries
Contractor must comply with guidelines issued by DHCS pertaining to
retention policies for the treatment of recoveries of all overpayments from
Contractor to a Provider, including for the treatment of recoveries of
overpayments due to Fraud, Waste, or Abuse. Contractor must also
comply with the process, timeframes, and documentation required for
reporting and paying to DHCS the recovery of overpayments, as set forth
in APL 23-011. APL 23-011 requires Contractor to notify DHCS of any
identified or recovered overpayments to a Provider due to potential fraud,
waste or abuse. Contractor must notify its Managed Care Operations
Division (MCOD) Contract Manager (CM) within 10 calendar days of the
date that the overpayment, and the DHCS Audits and Investigations Unit
regardless of the amount.
Contractor must split equally overpayment recoveries of $25 million or
more with DHCS. Contractor must report an overpayment of $25 million or
more to DHCS through their assigned MCOD CM within 60 calendar days
of the date that the overpayment. In addition, Contractor must comply with
[[page 109]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 109 of 642
this Contract, and all applicable State and federal law regarding
overpayment recoveries, including 42 CFR sections 438.608(a)(2) and (d).
A Contractor can retain each overpayment recovery that is less than $25
million. Contractor is required to report all overpayments in their annual
report to DHCS, using the rate development template, including recoveries
that are less than $25 million. Contractor does not need to report
overpayments that are less than $25 million within 60 calendar days of
when the overpayment was identified.
B. Annual Report
Contractor must annually report to DHCS its recoveries of overpayments
using the rate development (42 CFR section 438.608(d)(3)).
1.3.7 Federal False Claims Act Compliance and Support
A. Employee Education about False Claims Recovery
Contractor must provide to all its employees, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers written policies containing detailed
information about the False Claims Act and other federal and State laws
described in 42 United States Code (USC) section 1396a(a)(68), including
information about rights of employees to be protected as whistleblowers
(See also 42 CFR section 438.608(a)(6)).
Upon request by DHCS, Contractor must demonstrate compliance with
this Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.3.7.A (Employee Education
about False Claims Recovery), which may include providing DHCS with
copies of Contractor's applicable written policies and procedures and any
relevant employee handbook excerpts.
B. Cooperation with the Office of the Attorney General, DMFEA, or the US
DOJ Investigations and Prosecutions.
Contractor must fully cooperate in any investigation or prosecution
conducted by the Office of the Attorney General, DMFEA or the US DOJ.
Contractor’s cooperation must include, but is not limited to, providing upon
request, information, and access to records. Contractor is also responsible
for making their staff available for in-person interviews, consultation, grand
jury proceedings, pre-trial conference, depositions, and hearings at DHCS
headquarters in Sacramento.
C. Money Recovered from State Action Belongs to the State
[[page 110]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 110 of 642
In the event that DHCS receives a monetary recovery from the Office of
the Attorney General, DMFEA, or the US DOJ, as a result of DMFEA’s or
US DOJ’s prosecution of a Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or
Network Provider under the California False Claims Act (Government
Code (GC) § 12650 et seq.), the Federal False Claims Act (31 USC
section 3729 et seq.), or any other applicable laws, the entirety of such
monetary recovery belongs exclusively to DHCS, and Contractor waives
any claim to any portion of the recovery, except as determined by DHCS
in its sole discretion.
D. Payment to Contractor is from Government Funds
Medi-Cal payments to Contractor, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, Network Providers, and Providers are made from federal
and State government funds. DHCS retains the right to recover
overpayments made to Contractor, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, Network Providers, and/or Providers of Medi-Cal services,
medical supplies, or drugs as set forth in part in Exhibit B, Section 1.9
(Recovery of Amounts Paid to Contractor). In addition to DHCS’ recovery
rights, DMFEA and US DOJ may prosecute any act of health care Fraud
involving such government funds under the California False Claims Act
(GC § 12650 et seq.), the Federal False Claims Act (31 USC section 3729
et seq.), or any other applicable laws.
E. Contractor’s Settlements with Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers do not bind DHCS, DMFEA, or the
US DOJ.
Any settlement or resolution of a disputed matter involving Fraud, Waste,
or Abuse between Contractor and its Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, or Network Provider must include a written provision that
provides notice to the Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or
Network Provider that the settlement and/or resolution is not binding on
DHCS, DMFEA, or the US DOJ and does not preclude DHCS, DMFEA, or
the US DOJ from taking further action against Contractor or its
Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or Network Provider.
[[page 111]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 111 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
2.0 Systems and Processes
DHCS is committed to ensuring Contractors have the capabilities, systems and
processes that enable delivery of high-quality health care. The provisions in this
Article lay out DHCS’ expectations of Contractors to have Management
Information Systems (MIS) to collect, report, and analyze data to identify
Members’ needs and support Population Health Management. Contractors must
be able to not only submit Encounter Data, but have systems to ensure the data
are complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely, including for Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and Network Providers.
The provisions of this Article are also intended to ensure that Medi-Cal systems
and processes are innovative and adapting to the way in which Members seek
and access care. DHCS expects Contractors to build upon their MIS capabilities
to enable interoperability for data exchange with Health Information Technology
(HIT) systems and Health Information Exchange (HIE) Networks. Further,
Contractors must comply with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS) Interoperability and Patient Access Final Rule set forth at CMS-9115-F
and ensure that they and their Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and
Network Providers have the system capabilities to comply with the California
Health and Human Services Data Exchange Framework set forth in H&S section
130290. These requirements will enable the delivery system to have information
for Members where and when they need care.
To further drive standards of high quality care and Health Equity, this Article
includes provisions requiring Contractors to have both National Committee for
Quality Assurance (NCQA) Health Plan Accreditation and Health Equity
Accreditation by January 1, 2026. Further, DHCS specifies alignment of Quality
Improvement and Health Equity activities that align in principle with the DHCS
Comprehensive Quality Strategy and imposes requirements for Contractors to
meet or exceed minimum performance standards.
DHCS is committed to transparency to demonstrate accountability to the public
and community it serves. Consequently, DHCS requires public reporting of
information related to access, quality, delegation, quality improvement, and
Health Equity activities. Specific to public posting, this Article includes provisions
requiring Contractors to make available on their websites their annual Quality
Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Plan, meeting minutes from their
Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee (QIHEC), and Utilization
Management policies and procedures.
[[page 112]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 112 of 642
2.1 Management Information System
2.1.1 Management Information System Capability
2.1.2 Encounter Data Reporting
2.1.3 Participation in the State Drug Rebate Program
2.1.4 Network Provider Data Reporting
2.1.5 Program Data Reporting
2.1.6 Template Data Reporting
2.1.7 Management Information System/Data Audits
2.1.8 Management Information System/Data Correspondence
2.1.9 Tracking and Submitting Alternative Format Selections
2.1.10 Interoperability Application Programming Interface System Requirements
[[page 113]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 113 of 642
2.1 Management Information System
2.1.1 Management Information System Capability
Contractor’s Management and Information System (MIS) must be fully compliant
with 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.242 requirements and
must have the capability to capture, edit, and utilize various data elements for
both internal management use as well as to meet the data quality and timeliness
requirements of DHCS’s Encounter Data submission. Contractor must make
available to DHCS and to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
upon request all data related to this Contract.
A. Contractor must have and maintain a MIS that supports, at a minimum:
1) All Medi-Cal eligibility data;
2) Information on Members enrolled with Contractor,
3) Provider claims status and payment data;
4) Health care services delivery Encounter Data;
5) Network Provider Data;
6) Program Data;
7) Template Data;
8) Screening and assessment data;
9) Referrals including tracking of referred services to follow up with
Members to ensure that services were rendered;
10) Electronic health records;
11) Prior Authorization requests and a specialty referral system as
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.3 (Utilization
Management Program);
12) Complex Care Management (CCM) Care Manager assignment as
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.7 (Care
Management Programs);
13) Financial information as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 1.2.2 (Contractor’s Financial Reporting Obligations);
[[page 114]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 114 of 642
14) Social Drivers of Health (SDOH) data per All Plan Letter (APL) 21-
009;
15) Member and Member’s Authorized Representative (AR) Alternative
Format Selection(s) (AFS); and
16) Data sources specified in DHCS policies and guidance, including
APLs, the Enhanced Care Management (ECM) Policy Guide,
Community Supports Policy Guide, the Population Health
Management (PHM) Policy Guide, and the Policy and Operational
Guide for Planning and Implementing CalAIM Justice-Involved Re-
entry Initiative.
B. Contractor’s MIS must have processes that support the interactions
between financial data, Member/eligibility data, Network Provider Data,
Encounter Data, claims data, Program Data, Template Data, quality
management/quality improvement/Utilization Management data, and
report generation subsystems. The interactions of Contractor’s MIS
subsystems must be interoperable, efficient, and successful with
Contractor’s other MIS subsystems and DHCS’ systems and processes.
C. Contractor’s MIS must have the capability to transmit and consume data
files with and from DHCS, Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors,
Network Providers, other State and federal and local governmental
agencies, and other sources as needed to support Care Coordination and
overall administration of the Medi-Cal program. Data that must be able to
be transmitted and consumed include, but are not limited to:
1) Encounter Data;
2) Fee-For-Service (FFS) claims data; including carved-out claims
data, such as Medically Necessary services carved out of this
Contract and data available from partner organizations, including
but not limited to the Local Education Agency Medi-Cal Billing
Option Program (LEA BOP) and incarceration in-reach services;
3) Dental claims data;
4) Specialty mental health data;
5) Substance Use Disorder (SUD) data;
6) Medi-Cal FFS Treatment Authorization Request data;
7) California Children’s Services (CCS) Program data;
[[page 115]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 115 of 642
8) Targeted Case Management (TCM) data;
9) Pharmacy claims data;
10) Risk Tier assignment data;
11) Authorization and referral data; and
12) Medical record information including case notes.
Contractor must have processes in place for utilizing all data made
available in order to meet the requirements for and support of Care
Coordination, other administrative functions of the Contract with DHCS,
and Operational Readiness Requirements and Deliverables as described
in Exhibit A, Attachment II.
D. Contractor must implement and maintain a publicly accessible, standards-
based Patient Access Application Programming Interface (API), and a
Provider Directory API, as described in 42 CFR sections 431.60 and
431.70, and in APL 22-026. Contractor must operate the API in the
manner specified in 45 CFR section 170.215 and include information per
42 CFR section 438.242(b)(5) and (6).
2.1.2 Encounter Data Reporting
A. Contractor must maintain a MIS that consumes Encounter Data and/or
claims data and transmits Encounter Data, including allowed amounts and
paid amounts as required, to DHCS in compliance with 42 CFR sections
438.242 and 438.818 and in accordance with APLs.
B. Contractor must implement policies and procedures for ensuring the
complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely submission of Encounter Data
to DHCS, as defined in State and federal law, APLs, and this Contract, for
all items and services furnished to a Member under this Contract, whether
directly or through Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements, or Network Provider Agreements.
C. Contractor must require all Network Providers, Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and out-of-Network Providers to submit
claims and Encounter Data to Contractor to ensure compliance with this
Contract. Contractor must have mechanisms, including edit and reporting
systems, sufficient to ensure Encounter Data is complete, accurate,
reasonable, and timely, as defined in State and federal law and APLs,
prior to submission to DHCS. Contractor must ensure the completeness,
accuracy, reasonableness, and timeliness of all Network Provider,
Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, and out-of-Network Provider
[[page 116]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 116 of 642
Encounter Data regardless of contracting arrangements or whether the
Network Provider, Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or out-of-
Network Provider is reimbursed on a FFS or capitated basis.
D. Contractor must submit complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely
Encounter Data within six Working Days of the end of each month
following the month of payment, under this Contract or as otherwise
agreed upon by DHCS, and in the format specified by DHCS.
E. DHCS will review and validate Contractor’s Encounter Data, including
Encounter Data submitted by Contractor on behalf of its Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and Network Providers, for completeness,
accuracy, reasonableness, and timeliness.
F. If DHCS finds deficiencies regarding the completeness, accuracy,
reasonableness, or timeliness of Contractor’s Encounter Data and notifies
Contractor in writing of the deficiencies and requests correction and
resubmission of the relevant Encounter Data, Contractor must ensure that
corrected Encounter Data is resubmitted within 15 calendar days of the
date of DHCS' notice, or as mandated through federal law. Upon
Contractor's written request, DHCS may, in its sole discretion, grant an
extension for submission of corrected Encounter Data.
G. DHCS or its agent will periodically, but not less frequently than once every
three years, conduct an independent audit of the Encounter Data
submitted by, or on behalf of, Contractor, in accordance with 42 CFR
section 438.602(e). Contractor must comply with the requirements set
forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.9.E (Encounter Data
Validation).
2.1.3 Participation in the State Drug Rebate Program
A. Contractor must participate in the federal and State drug rebate program
by including all utilization data for both current and retroactive outpatient
drugs in its Encounter Data as necessary to meet federal requirements in
42 United States Code (USC) section 1396r - 8(k)(2).
1) Encounter Data for outpatient drugs must comply with 42 USC
section 1396r - 8(b)(1)(A); and
2) All outpatient drug Encounter Data must include, at a minimum, the
total number of units of each dosage form, strength, and package
size, by 11 numeric digit National Drug Code (NDC), for each claim,
including eligible Physician administered drug claims.
[[page 117]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 117 of 642
B. Pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.3(s), Contractor must ensure that
Encounter Data for outpatient drugs from participating organizations or
covered entities in the federal 340B program contains DHCS-required
identifiers to maintain compliance with the requirements of 42 USC section
256b(a)(5)(A)(i). Contractor must also comply with the provisions of
Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I) section 14105.46.
C. Contractor must assist DHCS in resolving manufacturer rebate disputes
related to Network Provider Data or Encounter Data submissions.
Encounter Data identified by DHCS or Contractor as having inaccurate or
incomplete units, NDCs, procedure codes, 340B identifiers, or other data
elements necessary to resolve manufacturer drug rebate disputes are
required to be corrected and resubmitted in compliance with APLs.
2.1.4 Network Provider Data Reporting
A. Contractor must maintain a MIS that collects and transmits Network
Provider Data to DHCS in compliance with 42 CFR sections 438.207,
438.604(a)(5), and 438.606, and in accordance with APLs.
B. Contractor must implement policies and procedures for ensuring the
complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely submission of Network
Provider Data, Subcontractor data, and Downstream Subcontractor data
to DHCS, as defined in State and federal law, APLs, DHCS 274
companion guide, and this Contract, that accurately represents
Contractor’s Network, whether directly or through Subcontractor
Agreements, Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, or Network
Provider Agreements.
C. Contractor must require all Network Providers, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors to submit Network Provider Data to
Contractor to ensure compliance with this Contract. Contractor must have
mechanisms, including edit and reporting systems, sufficient to ensure
Network Provider Data is complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely, as
defined in State and federal law and APLs, prior to submission to DHCS.
Contractor must ensure the completeness, accuracy, reasonableness, and
timeliness of all Network Provider, Subcontractor, and Downstream
Subcontractor Network Provider Data regardless of contracting
arrangements.
D. Contractor must submit complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely
Network Provider Data within ten calendar days following the end of each
month, or as mandated through federal law, and in a form and manner
specified by DHCS. Contractor must certify all Network Provider Data as
set forth in 42 CFR section 438.606. Subcontractors, Downstream
[[page 118]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 118 of 642
Subcontractors and Network Providers must comply with this Section for
submission of Network Provider Data to Contractor.
E. DHCS will review and validate Contractor’s Network Provider Data for
completeness, accuracy, reasonableness, and timeliness.
F. If DHCS finds deficiencies regarding the completeness, accuracy,
reasonableness, or timeliness of Contractor’s Network Provider Data and
notifies Contractor in writing of the deficiencies and requests correction
and resubmission of the relevant Network Provider Data, Contractor must
ensure that corrected Network Provider Data is resubmitted within 15
calendar days of the date of DHCS’ notice, or as mandated through
federal law. Upon Contractor's written request, DHCS may, in its sole
discretion, grant an extension for submission of corrected Network
Provider Data.
2.1.5 Program Data Reporting
A. Contractor must maintain a MIS that consumes and transmits Program
Data to DHCS in compliance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Article 7.0
(Operations Deliverables and Requirements) and in accordance with
APLs.
B. Contractor must implement policies and procedures for ensuring the
complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely submission of Program Data
to DHCS, as defined in State and federal law, APLs, and this Contract,
including, but not limited to, all Grievances, Appeals, referrals, out-of-
Network requests, medical exemption request denial reports and other
continuity of care requests, and Primary Care Provider (PCP) and Risk
Tier assignments received or determined by Contractor, whether directly
or through Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements, or Network Provider Agreements.
C. Contractor must require all Network Providers, Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and out-of-Network Providers to submit
Program Data to Contractor to ensure compliance with this Contract.
Contractor must have mechanisms, including edit and reporting systems,
sufficient to ensure Program Data is complete, accurate, reasonable, and
timely, as defined in State and federal law and APLs, prior to submission
to DHCS. Contractor must ensure the completeness, accuracy,
reasonableness, and timeliness of all Network Provider, Subcontractor,
Downstream Subcontractor, and out-of-Network Provider Program Data
regardless of contracting arrangements.
D. Contractor must submit complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely
Program Data within ten calendar days following the end of each month,
[[page 119]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 119 of 642
or as mandated through federal law, and in a form and manner specified
by DHCS. Contractor must certify all Program Data as set forth in 42 CFR
section 438.606. Network Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and out-of-Network Providers must comply with this
Subsection for submission of Program Data to Contractor.
E. DHCS will review and validate Contractor’s Program Data for
completeness, accuracy, reasonableness, and timeliness.
F. If DHCS finds deficiencies regarding the completeness, accuracy,
reasonableness, or timeliness of Contractor’s Program Data and notifies
Contractor in writing of the deficiencies and requests correction and
resubmission of the relevant Program Data, Contractor must ensure that
corrected Program Data is resubmitted within 15 calendar days of the date
of DHCS’ notice, or as mandated through federal law. Upon Contractor's
written request, DHCS may, in its sole discretion, grant an extension for
submission of corrected Program Data.
2.1.6 Template Data Reporting
A. Contractor must maintain a MIS that collects and reports Template Data to
DHCS in compliance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Article 7.0 (Operations
Deliverables and Requirements) and in accordance with APLs.
B. Contractor must implement policies and procedures for ensuring the
complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely submission of Template Data
to DHCS, as defined in State and federal law, APLs, and this Contract, for
all items and services furnished to a Member under this Contract, whether
directly or through Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements, or Network Provider Agreements.
C. Contractor must require all Network Providers, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors to submit Template Data to Contractor to
ensure compliance with this Contract. Contractor must have mechanisms,
including edit and reporting systems, sufficient to ensure Template Data is
complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely, as defined in State and
federal law and APLs, prior to submission to DHCS. Contractor must
ensure the completeness, accuracy, reasonableness, and timeliness of all
Network Provider, Subcontractor, and Downstream Subcontractor
Template Data regardless of contracting arrangements.
D. Contractor must submit complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely
Template Data on a regular basis, or as mandated through federal law,
and in a form and manner specified by DHCS. Contractor must certify all
Template Data as set forth in 42 CFR section 438.606. Subcontractors,
[[page 120]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 120 of 642
Downstream Subcontractors, and Network Providers must comply with
this Subsection for submission of Template Data to Contractor.
E. DHCS will review and validate Contractor’s Template Data for
completeness, accuracy, reasonableness, and timeliness.
F. If DHCS finds deficiencies regarding the completeness, accuracy,
reasonableness, or timeliness of Contractor’s Template Data and notifies
Contractor in writing of the deficiencies and requests correction and
resubmission of the relevant Template Data, Contractor must ensure that
corrected Template Data is resubmitted within 15 calendar days of the
date of DHCS' notice, or as mandated through federal law. Upon
Contractor's written request, DHCS may, in its sole discretion, grant an
extension for submission of corrected Template Data.
2.1.7 Management Information System/Data Audits
Contractor must conduct MIS and data audits to the extent directed by DHCS, in
accordance with this Contract, APLs, or other similar instructions which will be no
less frequently than once every three years.
2.1.8 Management Information System/Data Correspondence
When DHCS provides Contractor with written notice of any problems or
deficiencies related to the submittal of data to DHCS, or of any changes or
clarifications related to Contractor's MIS system, Contractor must submit to
DHCS a Corrective Action plan with measurable benchmarks within 15 calendar
days from the date of DHCS’ written notice to Contractor. DHCS will approve
Contractor’s Corrective Action plan or request revisions within 30 calendar days
of receipt of Contractor's Corrective Action plan. If DHCS requests revisions,
Contractor must submit a revised Corrective Action plan for DHCS’ approval
within 15 calendar days after receipt of the request. Contractor’s failure to
complete the Corrective Action plan as approved by DHCS will subject it to
sanctions, pursuant to Exhibit E, Section 1.19 (Sanctions). DHCS may publicly
disclose on the DHCS website any Contractors that have entered into Corrective
Action plans or have been subject to sanctions due to non-compliance under this
Section.
2.1.9. Tracking and Submitting Alternative Format Selections
A. Contractor must have and maintain systems that are able to, at a
minimum, perform the following functions:
1) Collect and store Member Alternative Format Selection (AFS), as
well as the AFS of a Member’s AR;
[[page 121]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 121 of 642
2) Share Member AFS data with DHCS as specified in the Alternative
Format Data Process Guide included in APL 22-002; and
3) Track Member’s AR AFS data and submit to DHCS when
requested.
B. Contractor must submit all Member AFS data that has been collected in a
one-time file upload to the DHCS Alternate Formats database, in the time
and manner specified in APL 22-002.
C. After Contractor’s one-time file upload is completed, Contractor must
submit to DHCS all new Member AFS at the time of the Member’s
request. Contractor must send submissions online through the AFS
application system, or by calling the AFS Helpline at (833) 284-0040.
D. DHCS will share Member AFS data with Contractor on an ongoing basis.
DHCS will send Contractor a weekly AFS file from the DHCS Alternative
Format Database. The DHCS weekly file data elements and file path are
included in the APL 22-002 AFS Technical Guidance attachment.
Contractor must utilize the weekly DHCS AFS file data to update their
records and provide Member materials in the requested alternative
formats.
E. Contractor must submit to DHCS policies and procedures for collecting
and sharing AFS data in accordance with the requirements in APL 22-002.
2.1.10 Interoperability Application Programming Interface System Requirements
A. In order to ensure Contractor applies the same standards for Encounter
Data contained in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.1.2 (Encounter Data
Reporting), to data collected and made available through its API,
Contractor must verify that data collected from Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors to be made available
through the API is complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely, and
collected in accordance with the oversight and monitoring requirements in
APL 22-026. Contractor must make all collected data available to DHCS
and CMS, upon request.
B. Contractor must conduct routine testing and monitoring of its API
functions, and applying system updates as appropriate, to ensure that the
API is compliant and functional.
C. Contractor may deny or discontinue any third-party application connection
to its API if Contractor determines that continued access presents an
unacceptable level of risk to the security of protected health information on
its systems. Contractor’s determination must be made in accordance with
[[page 122]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 122 of 642
the requirements provided in APL 22-026.
[[page 123]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 123 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
2.2 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program
2.2.1 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program Overview
2.2.2 Governing Board
2.2.3 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee
2.2.4 Provider Participation
2.2.5 Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Quality Improvement
Activities
2.2.6 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program Policies
and Procedures
2.2.7 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Annual Plan
2.2.8 National Committee for Quality Assurance Accreditation
2.2.9 External Quality Review Requirements
2.2.10 Quality Care for Children
2.2.11 Skilled Nursing Facilities—Long-Term Care
2.2.12 Disease Surveillance
2.2.13 Credentialing and Recredentialing
[[page 124]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 124 of 642
2.2 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program
Contractor must implement a Quality Improvement and Health Equity
Transformation Program (QIHETP) that includes, at a minimum, the standards
set forth in 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) sections 438.330 and
438.340, and 28 California Code of Regulations (CCR) section 1300.70, and be
consistent with the principles outlined in the DHCS Comprehensive Quality
Strategy and and a forthcoming All Plan Letter (APL). Contractor must monitor,
evaluate, and take timely action to address necessary improvements in the
Quality of Care delivered by all its Providers in any setting, and take appropriate
action to improve upon Health Equity. Contractor is responsible for the quality
and Health Equity of all Covered Services regardless of whether or not those
services have been delegated to a Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or
Network Provider.
A. Contractor must deliver quality care that enables all its Members to
maintain health and improve or manage a chronic illness or disability.
Contractor must ensure quality care in each of the following areas:
1) Clinical quality of physical health care;
2) Clinical quality of Behavioral Health care focusing on prevention,
recovery, resiliency, and rehabilitation;
3) Access to primary and specialty health care Providers and services;
4) Availability and regular engagement with Primary Care Providers
(PCP);
5) Continuity of care and Care Coordination across settings and at all
levels of care, including transitions in care, with the goal of
establishing consistent Provider-patient relationships; and
6) Member experience with respect to clinical quality, access and
availability, culturally and linguistically competent health care and
services, continuity of care, and Care Coordination.
B. Contractor must apply the principles of continuous quality improvement
(CQI) to all aspects of Contractor’s service delivery system through
analysis, evaluation, and systematic enhancements of the following:
1) Quantitative and qualitative data collection and data-driven
decision-making;
2) Up-to-date evidence-based practice guidelines and explicit criteria
developed by recognized sources or appropriately certified
[[page 125]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 125 of 642
professionals or, where evidence-based practice guidelines do not
exist, consensus of professionals in the field;
3) Feedback provided by Members, community partners, and Network
Providers in the design, planning, and implementation of its CQI
activities; and
4) Other issues identified by Contractor or DHCS.
C. Contractor must develop Population Health Management interventions
designed to address Social Drivers of Health (SDOH), reduce disparities
in health outcomes experienced by different subpopulations of Members,
and work towards achieving Health Equity by:
1) Developing equity-focused interventions intended to address
disparities in the utilization and outcomes of physical and
Behavioral Health care services; and
2) Engaging in a Member and family-centric approach in the
development of interventions and strategies, and in the delivery of
all health care services.
D. Contractor must ensure that the QIHETP requirements of this Contract are
applied to the delivery of both physical and Behavioral Health Services.
2.2.1 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program Overview
Contractor must maintain a QIHETP which includes the following, at a minimum:
A. Oversight and participation of Contractor’s Governing Board;
B. Creation and designation of a Quality Improvement and Health Equity
Committee (QIHEC) whose activities are supervised by Contractor’s
medical director or the medical director’s designee, in collaboration with
Contractor’s Chief Health Equity Officer;
C. Supervision of QIHETP activities by Contractor’s medical director and the
Chief Health Equity Officer; and
D. The participation of a broad range of Network Providers, including but not
limited to hospitals, clinics, county partners, physicians, Community Health
Workers (CHWs), and other non-clinical Providers in the process of
QIHETP development and performance review.
2.2.2 Governing Board
[[page 126]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 126 of 642
Contractor must implement and maintain written policies and procedures that
specify the responsibilities of its Governing Board, which include the following, at
a minimum:
A. Approving the overall QIHETP and the annual plan of the QIHETP;
B. Appointing an accountable entity or entities within Contractor's
organization responsible for the oversight of the QIHETP;
C. Receiving written QIHEC progress reports that describe actions taken,
progress in meeting QIHETP objectives, and improvements made; and
D. Directing necessary modifications to QIHETP policies and procedures to
ensure compliance with the Quality Improvement (QI) and Health Equity
standards in this Contract and the DHCS Comprehensive Quality
Strategy.
2.2.3 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee
A. Contractor must implement and maintain a Quality Improvement and
Health Equity Committee (QIHEC) designated and overseen by its
Governing Board. Contractor’s medical director or the medical director’s
designee must head QIHEC in collaboration with Contractor’s Chief Health
Equity Officer. Contractor must ensure that a broad range of Network
Providers, including but not limited to hospitals, clinics, county partners,
physicians, Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, Network
Providers, and Members, actively participate in the QIHEC or in any sub-
committee that reports to the QIHEC. The Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers that are part of QIHEC must be
representative of the composition of Contractor’s Network and include, at
a minimum, Network Providers who provide health care services to
Members affected by Health Disparities, Limited English Proficiency (LEP)
Members, Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs
(CYSHCN), Seniors and Persons with Disabilities (SPDs), and persons
with chronic conditions.
The QIHEC’s responsibilities include the following:
1) Analyze and evaluate the results of QI and Health Equity activities
including annual review of the results of performance measures,
utilization data, consumer satisfaction surveys, and the findings and
activities of other Contractor committees such as the Community
Advisory Committee (CAC);
2) Institute actions to address performance deficiencies, including
policy recommendations; and
[[page 127]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 127 of 642
3) Ensure appropriate follow-up of identified performance deficiencies.
B. Contractor must ensure Member confidentiality is maintained in QI
discussions and ensure avoidance of conflict of interest among the QIHEC
members.
C. Contractor must ensure that the QIHEC meets at least quarterly, and more
frequently if needed. A written summary of QIHEC activities, as well as
QIHEC activities of its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractors, findings, recommendations, and actions
must be prepared after each meeting and submitted to Contractor’s
Governing Board. Contractor must also submit the written summary to
DHCS quarterly.
D. Contractor must make the written summary of the QIHEC activities
publicly available on Contractor's website at least on a quarterly basis.
E. Contractor must ensure that its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors maintain a QIHEC that
meets the requirements set forth in this Section. Contractor must also
ensure that they report to Contractor’s QIHEC quarterly, at a minimum.
2.2.4 Provider Participation
Contractor must ensure that its Network Providers, Fully Delegated
Subcontractors, and Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors participate in
the QIHETP and Population Needs Assessment (PNA) as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.2 (Population Needs Assessment). Contractor
must incorporate its Fully Delegated Subcontractor and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractor data and results into the development of its PNA, as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.2 (Population Needs
Assessment). Contractor must regularly update its Network Providers, Fully
Delegated Subcontractors, and Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors on
activities, findings, and recommendations of the QIHEC’s QIHETP and PNA
results.
2.2.5 Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Quality Improvement
Activities
A. Contractor is accountable for all QI and Health Equity functions and
responsibilities that are delegated to Subcontractors and any Downstream
Subcontractors, in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
3.1.1 (Overview of Contractor’s Duties and Obligations). Contractor must,
at a minimum, specify the following requirements in its Subcontractor
Agreements and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, as applicable:
[[page 128]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 128 of 642
1) QI or Health Equity responsibilities, and specific subcontracted
functions and activities of Subcontractor and Downstream
Subcontractor;
2) The schedule for Contractor’s ongoing oversight, monitoring, and
evaluation of Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor,
including quarterly reporting and an annual review of
Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s performance;
3) Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s reporting
requirements and Contractor’s approval procedure of
Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s reports;
4) Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s obligation to
report findings and actions of QI or Health Equity activities at least
quarterly to Contractor; and
5) Contractor’s actions and remedies if Subcontractor’s and
Downstream Subcontractor’s obligations are not satisfactorily
performed.
B. Contractor must maintain an adequate oversight procedure to ensure
Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s compliance with all QI
or Health Equity delegated activities that, at a minimum:
1) Evaluates Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s ability
to perform the delegated activities, including an initial determination
that Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor have the
administrative capacity, experience, and budgetary resources to
fulfill their contractual obligations;
2) Ensures Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor meet QI
and Health Equity standards set forth in this Contract; and
3) Includes Contractor’s continuous monitoring, evaluation and
approval of its delegated functions to Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractor. Contractor must make the findings of
its continuous monitoring and evaluation of the Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractor available to DHCS at least annually,
but more frequently when directed by DHCS.
2.2.6 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program Policies
and Procedures
Contractor must develop, implement, maintain, and periodically update its
QIHETP policies and procedures that include, at a minimum, the following:
[[page 129]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 129 of 642
A. Contractor’s commitment to the delivery of quality and equitable health
care services;
B. Contractor’s, Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s, and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractor’s organizational chart, listing the key staff and
the committees responsible for QI and Health Equity activities, including
reporting relationships of QIHEC to executive staff;
C. Qualification and identification of staff who are responsible for QI and
Health Equity activities;
D. A process for sharing QIHETP findings with its Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and Network Providers;
E. The role, structure, and function of the QIHEC;
F. The policies and procedures to ensure that all Covered Services are
available and accessible to all Members regardless of sex, race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, ethnic group identification, age, mental
disability, physical disability, medical condition, health status, genetic
information, marital status, gender, gender identity, or sexual orientation,
or identification with any other persons or groups defined in Penal Code
section 422.56, and that all Covered Services are provided in a culturally
and linguistically appropriate manner;
G. The policies and procedures designed to identify, evaluate, and reduce
Health Disparities, by performing the following:
1) Analyzing data to identify differences in Quality of Care and
utilization, as well as the underlying reasons for variations in the
provision of care to its Members;
2) Developing equity-focused interventions to address the underlying
factors of identified Health Disparities, including SDOH; and
3) Meeting disparity reduction targets for specific populations and/or
measures as identified by DHCS and as directed under Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.9.A (Quality Performance
Measures).
H. Description of the integration of Utilization Management (UM) activities
into the QIHETP as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.3
(Utilization Management Program), including a process to integrate
reports on the number and types of service requests, denials, deferrals,
modifications, Appeals, and Grievances to the medical director or the
medical director’s designee;
[[page 130]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 130 of 642
I. Policies and procedures to adopt, disseminate, and monitor the use of
clinical practice guidelines that:
1) Are based on valid and reliable clinical evidence or a consensus of
health care professionals in the relevant field;
2) Consider the needs of Members;
3) Stem from recognized organizations that develop or promulgate
evidence-based clinical practice guidelines, or are developed with
involvement of board-certified Providers from appropriate
specialties;
4) Have been reviewed by Contractor’s medical director, as well as
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers, as appropriate; and
5) Are reviewed and updated at least every two years;
J. The inclusion of Population Health Management (PHM) activities,
including the findings of the annual PNA, as required in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.2 (Population Needs Assessment);
K. Policies and procedures that ensure the delivery of Medically Necessary
non-specialty and Specialty Mental Health Services as outlined in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Section 5.5 (Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder
Benefits);
L. Policies and procedures that ensure that Contractor and its
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, Network Providers, and
other entities with which Contractor contracts for the delivery of health
care services comply with all mental health parity requirements in 42 CFR
section 438.900 et seq.;
M. Mechanisms to detect both over- and under-utilization of services
including, but not limited to, outpatient Prescription Drugs;
N. Mechanisms to continuously monitor, review, evaluate, and improve
access to and availability of all Covered Services. The mechanisms must
include oversight processes that ensure Members are able to obtain
Medically Necessary appointments within established standards for time
or distance, timely access, and alternative access in accordance with APL
23-001, and Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I) sections 14197 and
14197.04;
[[page 131]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 131 of 642
O. Mechanisms to continuously monitor, review, evaluate, and improve
quality and Health Equity of clinical care services provided, including, but
not limited to, preventive services for Children and adults, perinatal care,
Primary Care, specialty, emergency, inpatient, Behavioral Health and
ancillary care services; and
P. Mechanisms to continuously monitor, review, evaluate, and improve
coordination and continuity of care services to all Members, including
SPDs, CYSHCNs, Members with chronic conditions, including Behavioral
Health, Members experiencing homelessness, Members recently released
from incarceration, Members who use Long-Term Services & Supports
(LTSS), and Children receiving Child welfare services.
2.2.7 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Annual Plan
Through regional quality and health equity teams, Contractor must develop and
submit an annual QI and Health Equity plan to DHCS, as directed below and in
and a forthcoming APL.
A. Develop QI and Health Equity plan annually for submission to DHCS that
includes the following, at a minimum:
1) A comprehensive assessment of the QI and Health Equity activities
undertaken, including an evaluation of the effectiveness of QI
interventions;
2) A written analysis of required Quality Performance Measure results,
and a plan of action to address performance deficiencies, including
analyses of each Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s and Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s performance measure results and
actions to address any deficiencies;
3) An analysis of actions taken to address any Contractor-specific
recommendations in the annual External Quality Review (EQR)
technical report and Contractor’s specific evaluation reports;
4) An analysis of the delivery of services and Quality of Care of
Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractors, based on data from multiple
sources, including quality performance results, Encounter Data,
Grievances and Appeals, Utilization Review and the results of
consumer satisfaction surveys;
5) Planned equity-focused interventions to address identified patterns
of over- or under-utilization of physical and Behavioral Health care
services;
[[page 132]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 132 of 642
6) A description of Contractor’s commitment to Member and/or family
focused care through Member and community engagement such as
review of CAC findings, Member listening sessions, focus groups or
surveys, and collaboration with local community organizations; and
how Contractor utilizes the information from this engagement to
inform Contractor policies and decision-making;
7) PHM activities and findings as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Section 4.3 (Population Health Management and Coordination of
Care); and
8) Outcomes/findings from Performance Improvement Projects (PIPs),
consumer satisfaction surveys and collaborative initiatives.
To the extent that Contractor delegates its QI and Health Equity activities
to its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractors, Contractor’s QI and Health Equity annual plan must
include evaluation and findings specific to the Fully Delegated
Subcontractor’s and Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s
performance.
B. Provide annual copies of all final reports of independent private
accrediting agencies (e.g. the National Committee for Quality Assurance
(NCQA)) relevant to Contractor’s, Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s, and
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s Medi-Cal line of business,
including:
1) Accreditation status, survey type, and level, as applicable;
2) Accreditation agency results, including recommended actions or
improvements, Corrective Action plans, and summaries of findings;
and
3) Expiration date of the accreditation.
In addition, pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.332, Contractor must
authorize independent private accrediting agencies to provide DHCS a
copy of Contractor’s most recent accreditation review annually.
C. Provide an annual report to DHCS that includes an assessment of all
Subcontractors’ and Downstream Subcontractors’ performance of its
delegated QI or Health Equity activities.
D. Contractor must make the QI and Health Equity plan publicly available on
its website on an annual basis.
[[page 133]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 133 of 642
E. Contractor must attend regional collaborative meetings which may include
additional regional partners including but not limited to county Mental
Health Plans (MHPs), Drug Medi-Cal (DMC), Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System (DMC-ODS), Local Government Agencies, public
hospitals, and community-based organizations (CBOs).
2.2.8 National Committee for Quality Assurance Accreditation
Contractor must have full NCQA Health Plan Accreditation (HPA) and NCQA
Health Equity Accreditation by no later than January 1, 2026. Contractor must
maintain full NCQA HPA and Health Equity Accreditation throughout the term of
this Contract and submit every 3 years NCQA Health Plan Accreditation and
Health Equity Accreditation results. Contractor must also complete additional
NCQA accreditation programs as directed by DHCS.
In accordance with W&I section 14184.203, Contractor must also ensure that all
its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractors have full NCQA HPA and Health Equity Accreditation by no later
than January 1, 2026. Contractor must also ensure all its Fully Delegated
Subcontractors and Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors maintain full
NCQA HPA and Health Equity Accreditation throughout the term of this Contract.
Contractor must ensure that its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractors also complete additional NCQA accreditation
programs as directed by DHCS.
Contractor must provide DHCS with the following components of Contractor’s,
Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s, and Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractor’s NCQA HPA and Health Equity Accreditation status and reviews
within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the completed report from NCQA:
A. Accreditation status;
B. Survey type;
C. Results of the review;
D. Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set (HEDIS ®) and
Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS ®)
summary level data;
E. Recommended actions or improvements;
F. Corrective Action plans and summaries of findings; and
G. Expiration date of the accreditation.
[[page 134]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 134 of 642
Contractor must notify DHCS of the date of its NCQA site visit within 15 calendar
days of confirmation of the site visit by NCQA. Contractor must make available all
written materials submitted to NCQA available to DHCS and allow DHCS
representative(s) to participate in the NCQA audit activities, including but not
limited to, the NCQA site visit.
Contractor must notify DHCS of any change in NCQA HPA and Health Equity
Accreditation status within 30 calendar days of receipt of the final NCQA report.
In addition to complying with the Corrective Actions imposed by NCQA,
Contractor must also comply with any additional Corrective Actions imposed by
DHCS to address a change in Contractor’s accreditation status.
If Contractor fails to obtain or maintain its HPA or Health Equity Accreditation
status within the timeframe described above and anytime thereafter, Contractor
will be subject to Corrective Actions by DHCS, including but not limited to, the
actions set forth in Exhibit E, Sections 1.16 (Termination), 1.19 (Sanctions), and
1.20 (Liquidated Damages).
Contractor must have policies and procedures in place to oversee the HPA and
Health Equity Accreditation status of its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors throughout the term of this
Contract. Contractor must have policies and procedures in place to subject its
Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractors to Corrective Actions if Contractor’s Fully Delegated
Subcontractor or Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor fails to maintain its
HPA and Health Equity Accreditation status, including, but not limited to,
termination of Subcontractor Agreements or Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements with Fully Delegated Subcontractors or Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractors, sanctions, and damages.
2.2.9 External Quality Review Requirements
At least annually or more frequently as directed by DHCS, Contractor must
cooperate with and assist the External Quality Review Organization (EQRO)
designated by DHCS in conducting its EQR reviews of Contractor in accordance
with 42 USC section 1396u-2(c)(2), 42 CFR section 438.310 et seq., and 22
CCR section 53860(d).
Contractor must comply with all requirements set forth in 42 CFR section
438.310 et seq., the forthcoming APL, and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS) EQR protocols, which provide detailed instructions on how to
complete the EQR activities.
In addition, Contractor must also comply with the following requirements:
A. Quality Performance Measures
[[page 135]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 135 of 642
On an annual basis, Contractor must track and report on a set of Quality
Performance Measures and Health Equity measures identified by DHCS
in accordance with all of the following requirements:
1) Contractor must work with the EQRO to conduct an onsite
assessment of the Quality Measure Compliance Audit and DHCS-
required Quality Performance Measures;
2) Contractor must calculate and report all required Quality
Performance Measures and Health Equity measures at the county
or regional reporting unit level and possibly Skilled Nursing Facility
(SNF) level as directed by DHCS. Contractor must separately
report to DHCS all required performance measure results at the
county or reporting unit level and SNF level for certain measures for
its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors
a) Contractor must calculate performance measure rates, to be
verified by the EQRO;
b) Contractor must report audited results on the required
performance measures to DHCS no later than June 15 of
each year or on another date as established by DHCS.
Contractor must initiate reporting on required Quality
Performance Measures for the reporting cycle following the
first year of this Contract operation;
3) Contractor must meet or exceed the DHCS-established Minimum
Performance Level (MPL) for each required Quality Performance
Measure and Health Equity measure selected by DHCS. Contractor
must ensure that its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors whose rates
Contractor separately reports to DHCS also meet or exceed the
DHCS-established MPL for each required Quality Performance
Measure and Health Equity measure selected by DHCS.
4) Contractor must meet Health Disparity reduction targets for specific
populations and measures as identified by DHCS.
5) In accordance with 42 CFR section 438.700 et seq., W&I section
14197.7, and Exhibit E, DHCS may impose financial sanctions,
administrative sanctions, and/or Corrective Actions on Contractor
for failure to meet or exceed required MPLs as detailed in APL 23-
012. DHCS may require Contractor to make changes to its
executive personnel if a Contractor has persistent and pervasive
[[page 136]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 136 of 642
poor performance as evidenced by multiple performance measures
consistently below the MPL over multiple years. DHCS may also
limit Contractor’s Service Area expansion or suspend Member
Enrollment based on Contractor’s persistent and pervasive poor
performance on Quality Performance Measures.
In addition to sanctions and Corrective Actions, DHCS reserves the right,
subject to actuarial judgment and generally accepted actuarial principles
and practices, to consider Contractor’s performance on specified quality
and equity benchmarks, as determined by DHCS and communicated to
Contractors in advance of each applicable Rating Period, within the
determination of Capitation Payment rates for that Rating Period.
Contractor is responsible for ensuring that its Fully Delegated
Subcontractors and Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors also
meet or exceed the DHCS-established MPL. If its Fully Delegated
Subcontractor or Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor fails to meet
or exceed the DHCS-established MPL, Contractor must have policies and
procedures in place to subject its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors to appropriate enforcement
actions, which may include, but are not limited to, financial sanctions,
corrective action plans, and a requirement to change its executive
personnel.
B. PIPs
1) Contractor must conduct or participate in PIPs, including any PIP
required by CMS, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.330.
Contractor must conduct or participate in, at a minimum, two (2)
PIPs per year, as directed by DHCS. At its sole discretion, DHCS
may require Contractor to conduct or participate in additional PIPs,
including statewide PIPs. DHCS may also require Contractor to
participate in statewide collaborative PIP workgroups.
2) Contractor must have policies and procedures in place to ensure
that its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors also conduct and participate in PIPs and
any collaborative PIP workgroups as directed by CMS or DHCS.
3) Contractor must comply with the PIP requirements outlined in a
forthcoming APL and must use the PIP reporting format as
designated therein to request DHCS’ approval of proposed PIPs.
4) Each PIP must include the following:
[[page 137]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 137 of 642
a) Measurement of performance using objective quality
indicators;
b) Implementation of equity-focused interventions to achieve
improvement in the access to and Quality of Care;
c) Evaluation of the effectiveness of the interventions based on
the performance measures; and
d) Planning and initiation of activities for increasing or
sustaining improvement.
5) Contractor must report the status of each PIP at least annually to
DHCS.
C. Consumer Satisfaction Survey
1) On an annual basis until January 1, 2026, Contractor must timely
provide all data requested by the EQRO in a format designated by
the EQRO in conducting a consumer satisfaction survey.
2) Beginning January 1, 2026, concurrent with the requirement for
HPA by the NCQA, Contractor must publicly post the annual results
of its, and its Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s and Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s, CAHPS survey on Contractor’s
website, including results of any supplemental questions as
directed by DHCS.
3) If Contractor has HPA prior to January 1, 2026 and reports its
CAHPS data to the NCQA, Contractor must publicly post the
annual results of its, and its Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s and
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s, CAHPS survey on
Contractor’s website, including results of any supplemental
questions as directed by DHCS.
4) Contractor must incorporate results from the CAHPS survey in the
design of QI and Health Equity activities.
D. Network Adequacy Validation
Contractor must participate in the EQRO’s validation of Contractor’s
Network adequacy representations from the preceding 12 months to
comply with requirements set forth in 42 CFR sections 438.14(b), 438.68,
and 438.358.
E. Encounter Data Validation
[[page 138]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 138 of 642
As directed by DHCS, Contractor must participate in EQRO’s validation of
Encounter Data from the preceding 12 months to comply with
requirements set forth in 42 CFR sections 438.242(d) and 438.818.
F. Focused Studies
As directed by DHCS, Contractor must participate in an external review of
focused clinical and/or non-clinical topic(s) as part of DHCS’ review of
quality outcomes and timeliness of, and access to, services provided by
Contractor.
G. Technical Assistance
In accordance with 42 CFR section 438.358(d) and at the direction of
DHCS, Contractor must implement EQRO’s technical guidance provided
to Contractor in conducting mandatory and optional activities described in
42 CFR section 438.358 and this Contract.
2.2.10 Quality Care for Children
Contractor must maintain a robust program to ensure the provision of all
physical, behavioral, and oral health services to Members less than 21 years of
age. Contractor must also maintain mechanisms to identify and improve on gaps
in the quality of and access to care in each of the following areas:
A. Scope of Services
1) Contractor must ensure the provision of all screening, preventive
and Medically Necessary diagnostic and treatment services for
Members less than 21 years of age in accordance with Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.4 (Services for Members Less Than
21 Years of Age);
2) Contractor must actively promote Early and Periodic Screening,
Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) screenings and American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Bright Futures preventive services to
Members and their families. Per APL 23-005, on an annual basis by
January 1 of each year, Contractor must mail or share
electronically, DHCS Medi-Cal for Kids and Teens Materials for
existing Members under the age of 21. For new Members,
Contractor is required to mail or share electronically, DHCS Medi-
Cal for Kids and Teens Materials within seven calendar days of the
enrollment. Additionally, Contractor must ensure Network Providers
receive standardized training on EPSDT utilizing the developed
[[page 139]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 139 of 642
DHCS Medi-Cal for Kids and Teens Outreach and Education
Toolkit;
3) Contractor must identify Members who have not utilized EPSDT
screening services or AAP Bright Futures preventive services and
ensure outreach to these Members in a culturally and linguistically
appropriate manner;
4) Contractor must maintain Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs)
with Local Health Departments (LHDs) and Local Government
Agencies (LGAs), in Contractor’s Service Area(s), including but not
limited to California Children’s Services (CCS), the Women, Infants
and Children Supplemental Nutrition Program (WIC), maternal and
Child health, social services, Regional Centers, and Child welfare
departments, as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
5.6.1 (MOU Purpose) in order to facilitate the provision of EPSDT
services to Members less than 21 years of age;
5) Contractor must comply with APL 23-005 requirements to include
conducting ongoing training, at least once every two years, for
Network Providers on required preventive healthcare services,
including EPSDT services for Members less than 21 years of age
as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.2.5.B
(Network Provider Training), to ensure Providers are able to
support Members and families in fully utilizing EPSDT services.
B. Utilization Management
Contractor must ensure that all requirements outlined in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 2.3 (Utilization Management Program) apply to the
review and provision of Medically Necessary services for Members less
than 21 years of age.
C. Population Health Management (PHM) and Coordination of Care
1) Contractor must ensure that all requirements outlined in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 4.3 (Population Health Management and
Coordination of Care), including the development of the annual
PNA, apply to Members less than 21 years of age;
2) Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractors must provide a comprehensive
wellness and prevention program to all Members less than 21 years
of age, which includes but is not limited to (see full requirements in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.8 (Basic Population Health
Management)) initiatives, programs, and evidence-based
[[page 140]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 140 of 642
approaches to improving access to preventive health visits,
developmental screenings, and services for Members less than 21
years of age, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
5.3.4 (Services for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age).
D. Network and Access to Care
1) Contractor must ensure that each Member less than 21 years of
age has an assigned PCP as well as access to Specialists for
Covered Services and Medically Necessary services, in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.1
(Access to Network Providers and Covered Services);
2) Contractor must provide information to all Network Providers
regarding the Vaccines for Children (VFC) Program and is
expected to promote and support Enrollment of applicable Network
Providers in the VFC program in order to improve access to
immunizations; and
3) Contractor must maintain and continually monitor, improve, and
evaluate cultural and linguistic services that support the delivery of
Covered Services to Members less than 21 years of age, in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11
(Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees).
E. Quality and Health Equity
1) Contractor must identify and address underutilization of Children’s
preventive services including but not limited to EPSDT services
such as well Child visits, developmental screenings and
immunizations;
2) Contractor must report on DHCS-identified Quality Performance
Measures and Health Equity performance measures related to
health care services for Members less than 21 years of age, and
must exceed any DHCS-specified MPL, in accordance with Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.9.A (Quality Performance
Measures);
3) Contractor must engage with local entities when developing
interventions and strategies to address deficiencies in performance
measures related to health care services for Members less than 21
years of age;
4) Contractor must meet any Health Disparity reduction targets for
specific populations and measures for Members less than 21 years
[[page 141]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 141 of 642
of age, as identified by DHCS and in accordance with Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.9.A.2 (Quality Performance
Measures);
5) Contractor must participate in any value-based payment programs
for services provided to Members less than 21 years of age, as
directed by DHCS;
6) Contractor must engage in planned Health Equity-focused
interventions to address identified gaps in the quality of and access
to care for Members less than 21 years of age, including preventive
and screening services; and
7) Contractor must engage in a Member and family-oriented
engagement strategy to QI and Health Equity, including Children
and caregiver representation on the Community Advisory
Committee (CAC), and using CAC findings and recommendations,
and the results of Member listening sessions, focus groups and
surveys, to inform QI and Health Equity interventions, as outlined in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11.D. (Cultural and
Linguistic Programs and Committees).
F. Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services
Contractor must adhere to all requirements of Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Section 5.5 (Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Benefits) for the
provision of mental health and Substance Use Disorder services to
Members less than 21 years of age, as appropriate, including
collaborating with county Behavioral Health plans and complying with APL
23-010 and all mental health parity requirements in 42 CFR section
438.900 et seq.
Contractor must collaborate with DHCS in its effort to implement the
California Children and Youth Behavioral Health Initiative.
G. School-Based Services
To facilitate the provision of Medically Necessary services to Children,
Contractor must collaborate with, and, by January 1, 2025 execute, an
MOU with Local Education Agencies (LEAs) in each county within
Contractor’s Service Area for school-based services, including but not
limited to EPSDT and Behavioral Health Services for Members less than
21 years of age. Contractor must also ensure that Members’ PCP (PCP)
cooperate and collaborate with LEAs in the development of Individualized
Education Plans (IEPs) or Individualized Family Service Plans (IFSPs)
and ultimately ensure that care is coordinated regardless of financial
[[page 142]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 142 of 642
responsibility, as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsections 4.3.16
(School-Based Services) and 5.6.1 (MOU Purpose).
2.2.11 Skilled Nursing Facilities – Long-Term Care
Contractor must implement and maintain policies and procedures for providing
applicable Long-Term Care (LTC) services for Members as detailed in Exhibit A
Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.7.G (Services for All Members). Contractors must
maintain a comprehensive Quality Assurance Performance Improvement (QAPI)
program for LTC services provided. Contractors must have a system in place to
collect quality assurance and improvement findings from CDPH to include, but
not be limited to, survey deficiency results, site visit findings, and complaint
findings. Contractor’s comprehensive QAPI program must incorporate all
requirements in APL 23-004.
2.2.12 Disease Surveillance
Contractor must implement and maintain procedures for reporting any serious
diseases or conditions to both local and State public health authorities and to
implement directives from the public health authorities as required by law,
including but not limited to, 17 CCR section 2500 et seq.
2.2.13 Credentialing and Recredentialing
Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors must implement and maintain written policies and
procedures regarding the initial Credentialing, recredentialing, recertification, and
reappointment of Network Providers in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.214
and APL 22-013. Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors must ensure its policies and
procedures are reviewed and approved by its Governing Board. Contractor must
ensure that the responsibility for recommendations regarding Credentialing
decisions rests with a Credentialing committee or other peer review body.
A. Standards
Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors must ensure that all their Network Providers
who deliver Covered Services and have executed Network Provider
Agreements with Contractor are qualified in accordance with current
applicable legal, professional, and technical standards, and are
appropriately licensed, certified, or registered.
Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors must ensure that all their Network Providers
have good standing in the Medicare and Medicaid/Medi-Cal programs and
[[page 143]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 143 of 642
have a valid National Provider Identifier (NPI) number. Contractor must
ensure that Providers that have been terminated from either Medicare or
Medicaid/Medi-Cal cannot participate in Contractor’s Network.
Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors must ensure that all contracted Laboratory
Testing Sites have either a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Act (CLIA)
certificate or waiver of a certificate of registration along with a CLIA
identification number.
B. Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Credentialing
Contractor may delegate Credentialing and recredentialing activities, but
Contractor remains ultimately responsible for the completeness and
accuracy of these activities, as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 3.1.1 (Overview of Contractor’s Duties and Obligations).
C. Credentialing Provider Organization Certification
Contractor may obtain Credentialing provider organization certification
(POC) from the NCQA. Contractor may accept evidence of NCQA POC
certification in lieu of a monitoring visit at Network Provider’s facilities.
D. Disciplinary Actions
Contractor must implement and maintain a system for the reporting of
serious quality deficiencies that result in suspension or termination of a
practitioner, including dentists, to the appropriate authorities. Contractor
must implement and maintain policies and procedures for disciplinary
actions including, reducing, suspending, or terminating the privileges of
practitioners, including dentists. Contractor must implement and maintain
a Provider appeal process.
E. Medi-Cal and Medicare Provider Status
Contractor must verify that its Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers have not been terminated as
Medi-Cal or Medicare Providers or have not been placed under a
restriction (payment or temporary suspension) resulting in placement on
the Suspended and Ineligible Provider List, List of Excluded Entities, or
Restricted Provider Database. Contractor cannot maintain contracts with
Network Providers, Subcontractors, or Downstream Subcontractors who
have been terminated by either Medicare or Medi-Cal or placed on the
Suspended and Ineligible Provider List.
F. Contractor’s NCQA Health Plan Accreditation
[[page 144]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 144 of 642
If Contractor has received an accredited status from NCQA, Contractor
will be deemed to meet the DHCS requirements for Credentialing and may
be exempt from the DHCS medical review audit for Credentialing.
G. Credentialing of Other Non-Physician Providers
Contractor and its Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors must develop and maintain policies and
procedures that ensure that the credentials of Nurse Practitioners,
Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs), clinical nurse Specialists, Physician
Assistants, mental health Providers, and substance use treatment
Providers have been verified in accordance with State requirements
applicable to the Provider category.
[[page 145]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 145 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
2.3 Utilization Management Program
2.3.1 Prior Authorizations and Review Procedures
2.3.2 Timeframes for Medical Authorization
2.3.3 Review of Utilization Data
2.3.4 Delegating Utilization Management Activities
[[page 146]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 146 of 642
2.3 Utilization Management Program
Contractor must develop, implement, update as needed (but at least annually),
and improve its Utilization Management (UM) program to ensure appropriate
processes are used to review and approve the provision of Medically Necessary
Covered Services for its Members. Contractor must ensure that its UM program:
A. Includes a designated medical director or clinical director responsible for
the UM process in accordance with Health & Safety Code (H&S) section
1367.01, and qualified staff responsible for the UM program.
B. Prohibits medical decisions to be influenced by fiscal and administrative
management. Compensation of individuals or entities that conduct UM
activities must not be structured to provide incentives to deny, limit, or
discontinue Medically Necessary Covered Services.
C. Allows for a second opinion from a qualified health professional within the
Network, if available. If a qualified health professional within the Network
is not available, Contractor must authorize an out-of-Network Provider to
provide the second opinion at no cost to the Member, in accordance with
42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.206.
D. Makes available to Network Providers all relevant UM policies and
procedures upon request.
E. Makes available to Members all relevant UM policies and procedures
upon request. Makes available to Members clinical criteria used by
Contractor, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors, as
applicable for assessing Medical Necessity for Covered Services.
F. Provides training to Network Providers on the procedures and services
that require Prior Authorization for Medically Necessary Covered Services,
and ensures that all Network Providers are aware of the procedures and
timeframes necessary to obtain Prior Authorization for Medically
Necessary Covered Services, within 30 calendar days of executing this
Contract and within 30 calendar days of contracting with a Network
Provider.
G. Has a Standing Referral process providing a determination within three
Working Days from the date the request is made by the Member or the
Member’s Primary Care Providers (PCP) and all appropriate Medical
Records and other items of information necessary to make the
determination are provided. Once a determination is made, the referral
must be made within four Working Days of the date that the proposed
treatment plan, if any, is submitted to Contractor’s medical director or the
medical director’s designee, in accordance with H&S section 1374.16.
[[page 147]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 147 of 642
H. Has a specialty referral system to track and monitor referrals requiring
Prior Authorization by Contractor. When Prior Authorization is delegated to
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors, Contractor must ensure
that Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors have systems in
place to track and monitor referrals requiring Prior Authorization and must
furnish documentation of Subcontractor's and Downstream
Subcontractor’s referrals to DHCS upon request. Contractor’s specialty
referral systems must include authorized, denied, deferred, or modified
referrals, and the timeliness of the referrals. Contractor’s specialty referral
systems must include information on requested out-of-Network services.
Contractor must ensure that all Network Providers are aware of the
specialty referral processes and tracking procedures.
I. Integrates UM activities into the Quality Improvement System (QIS)
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.2 (Quality Improvement
and Health Equity Transformation Program (QIHETP)), including a
process to integrate reports on the number and types of service requests,
denials, deferrals, modifications, Appeals, and Grievances to the medical
director or their designee.
J. Has timelines and processes that do not impose Quantitative Treatment
Limitations (QTL) or Non-Quantitative Treatment Limitations (NQTL) more
stringently on covered mental health and Substance Use Disorder (SUD)
services than are imposed on medical/surgical services, in accordance
with the parity in mental health and SUD requirements in 42 CFR section
438.900, et seq.
K. Makes Contractor’s UM policies and procedures available to Members
and Providers on Contractor’s website and upon request. These policies
and procedures must set out how Contractor authorizes, modifies, delays,
or denies health care services via Prior Authorization, concurrent
authorization, or Retrospective Review, under the services provided by
Contractor in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.915.
1) Contractor must ensure that policies and procedures for
authorization decisions are based on the Medical Necessity of a
requested Covered Service and are consistent with criteria or
guidelines supported by sound clinical principles and evidence-
based practice.
2) Contractor must ensure that policies, processes, strategies,
evidentiary standards, and other factors used for UM are
consistently applied to medical/surgical, mental health, and SUD
services and benefits.
[[page 148]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 148 of 642
3) Contractor must notify Network Providers, as well as Members and
Potential Members upon request, of all services that require Prior
Authorization, concurrent authorization, or Retrospective Review,
and ensure that all Network Providers are aware of the procedures
and timeframes necessary to obtain authorization for these
services.
All UM activities must be performed in accordance with H&S sections 1363.5 and
1367.01 and 28 California Code of Regulations (CCR) section 1300.70(a)(3),
(b)(2)(H), and (c).
2.3.1 Prior Authorizations and Review Procedures
Contractor must ensure that its Prior Authorization, concurrent review, and
Retrospective Review authorization procedures meet the following minimum
requirements, in accordance with H&S section 1367.01:
A. Contractor must consult with Providers as needed for Prior Authorization
requests for the purposes of determining Medical Necessity for Covered
Services unless doing so would lead to undue delay in care;
B. Decisions to deny or to authorize an amount, duration, or scope that is
less than requested must be made by a qualified health care professional
with appropriate clinical expertise in treating the medical or Behavioral
Health condition and disease or Long-Term Services and Supports (LTSS)
needs. Appropriate clinical expertise may be demonstrated by relevant
specialty training, experience, or certification. Qualified health care
professionals do not have to be an expert in all conditions and may use
other resources to make appropriate decisions;
C. Qualified health care professionals must supervise the review of medical
decisions, including service reductions, and must review all denials that
are made, in whole or in part, based on Medical Necessity. Contractor is
not responsible for the review of Prior Authorizations for physician
administered drugs, medical supplies, enteral nutritional products, and
covered outpatient Prescription Drugs provided by an outpatient
pharmacy. Contractor must review Prior Authorizations for physician
administered drugs which include Prescription Drugs administered by a
health care professional in a clinic, physician’s office, or outpatient setting;
medical supplies; and enteral nutritional products. These Prescription
Drugs and supplies are covered under the medical benefit and would be
included in the medical claim or encounter;
D. Contractor must establish written criteria or guidelines for UM that are
developed with practicing health care Providers. The written criteria or
guidelines must be based on sound clinical practices and processes which
[[page 149]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 149 of 642
are evaluated and updated when necessary, and at least annually, in
accordance with H&S section 1363.5;
E. Contractor must provide a clear and concise written explanation of the
reasons for denying, deferring, or modifying a service; a description of the
criteria or guidelines used; and the clinical reasons for the decision based
on Medical Necessity. Any written communication to a Provider of a
denial, delay, or modification of a request must include the name and
telephone number of Contractor’s health care professional responsible for
the denial, delay, or modification;
F. Contractor must notify Members regarding denied, deferred or modified
referrals as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.5,
(Notices of Action for Denial, Deferral, or Modification of Prior
Authorization Requests). Contractor must publish on its website an
Appeals procedure for both Providers and Members;
G. Decisions and Appeals must be made in a timely manner and not be
unduly delayed when Member’s medical condition requires time sensitive
services;
H. Prior Authorization requirements must not be applied to Emergency
Services, family planning services, preventive services, basic prenatal
care, sexually transmitted disease services, Human Immunodeficiency
Virus (HIV) testing, or initial mental health and SUD assessments;
I. Records relating to Prior Authorization requests, including any Notices of
Action (NOA), must meet the retention requirements described in Exhibit
E, Section 1.22 (Inspection and Audit of Records and Facilities);
J. Contractor must notify the requesting Provider of any decision to deny,
approve, modify, or delay a service authorization request, a request by a
Member or a Member’s Provider for the provision of a Covered Service, or
when authorizing a service in an amount, duration, or scope that is less
than requested. The notice to the Provider may be oral or in writing; and
K. All of Contractor’s authorization requirements must comply with the
requirements for parity in mental health and SUD benefits in 42 CFR
section 438.900, et seq.
2.3.2 Timeframes for Medical Authorization
A. Emergency Services: Contractor must not require Prior Authorization for
Emergency Services for complaints or conditions that a prudent layperson
would determine could seriously jeopardize their physical or mental health.
[[page 150]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 150 of 642
B. Post-Stabilization Care Services: Contractor must respond to a Network
Provider’s or out-of-Network Provider’s request for authorization for Post-
Stabilization Care Services within 30 minutes or the service is deemed
approved, in accordance with All Plan Letter (APL) 23-009.
C. Non-Urgent Care Following an Exam in the Emergency Room: Contractor
must respond to a Provider’s request for Post-Stabilization Care Services
within 30 minutes or the service is deemed approved.
D. Retrospective Review Authorization Request for Treatment Received:
Contractor must accept requests for Retrospective Review authorization
within a reasonably established time limit, not to exceed 365 calendar
days from the date of service. Contractor must communicate decisions to
the Provider and to the Member who received the services or to the
Member’s Authorized Representative (AR) within 30 calendar days of the
receipt of information that is reasonably necessary to make this
determination, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.404(a) and H&S
section 1367.01(h)(1).
E. Routine Authorizations: Contractor must respond to routine requests and
concurrent requests as expeditiously as the Member’s condition requires,
but no longer than five Working Days from receipt of the information
reasonably necessary and requested by Contractor to render a decision,
and no longer than 14 calendar days from Contractor’s receipt of the
request, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.210 and H&S section
1367.01.
F. Expedited Authorizations: Contractor must make expedited authorization
decisions for service requests where a Member’s Provider indicates, or
Contractor, Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or Network
Provider determines that, following the standard timeframe for Prior
Authorizations and concurrent requests could seriously jeopardize the
Member’s life; health; or ability to attain, maintain, or regain maximum
function, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.210 and H&S section
1367.01. Contractor must provide its authorization decision as
expeditiously as the Member’s health condition requires, but no longer
than 72 hours after Contractor’s receipt of the request for services. All
Contractors must also expedite Prior Authorization requests for Members
who are transitioning from an acute care hospital to all settings including
Contractor chosen Community Supports and make an authorization
decision in a timeframe that is appropriate for the nature of the Member’s
condition but is no longer than 72 hours after Contractor’s receipt of all
information needed to make an authorization decision.
G. Hospice Services: Contractor may only require Prior Authorization for
inpatient hospice care. Contractor must respond to inpatient hospice care
[[page 151]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 151 of 642
authorization requests in accordance with 22 CCR section 51003 and
APLs.
H. Therapeutic Enteral Formula: Contractor must comply with all timeframes
for medical authorization of Medically Necessary therapeutic enteral
formula billed on a medical or institutional claim and the equipment and
supplies necessary for delivery of enteral formula billed on a medical or
institutional claim, as set forth in all applicable DHCS APLs, Welfare and
Institutions Code (W&I) section 14103.6, and H&S section 1367.01.
I. Physician Administered Drugs: Contractor must respond to requests for
authorization of physician administered drugs billed on a medical or
institutional claim within 24 hours of receipt of the request, in accordance
with 42 USC section 1396r-8, 42 CFR sections 438.210 and 438.3, and
W&I section 14185. If the physician administered drug is a “covered
outpatient drug,” as defined in 42 USC section 1396r-8(k)(2) and (k)(3),
Contractor cannot obtain an extension of time to respond. However, if the
physician administered drug is not a “covered outpatient drug,” Contractor
may obtain an extension of time to respond, as set forth in 42 CFR section
438.210
.
2.3.3 Review of Utilization Data
A. Contractor must include within the UM program mechanisms to detect
both under- and over-utilization of health care services including
Behavioral Health Services. Contractor’s internal reporting mechanisms
used to detect Member utilization and Provider prescribing patterns must
be reported to DHCS no later than 30 calendar days after the beginning of
each calendar year and upon request.
B. Contractor must monitor utilization data to appropriately identify Members
eligible for Enhanced Care Management (ECM) and applicable
Community Supports as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
4.4.6 (Member Identification for Enhanced Care Management) and
Subsection 4.5.6 (Identifying Members for Community Supports).
C. Contractor must monitor and track Non-specialty Mental Health Services
(NSMHS) utilization data for both Members. Upon request, Contractor
must submit data to DHCS.
2.3.4 Delegating Utilization Management Activities
Contractor may delegate UM activities. If Contractor delegates any UM activities,
Contractor must comply with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.5
(Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Quality Improvement Activities).
[[page 152]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 152 of 642
[[page 153]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 153 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
3.0 Providers, Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors
DHCS is committed to ensuring that all Contractors are aware of their obligations
under this Contract and are committed to being accountable not only for their own
obligations, but for those of their Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors
for delegated functions. In this Article, DHCS includes provisions requiring
Contractors to disclose what entities provide delegated functions through
Subcontractor Agreements and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements as
applicable.
In addition, Contractors are to demonstrate that they have robust compliance,
monitoring, and oversight programs, including for all delegated entities to ensure
Members receive quality care and have access to services. This Article requires
Contractors to not only disclose delegation arrangements but include justification
for the use of delegated entities to ensure that the Member’s experience and
outcomes are front and center. DHCS is particularly focused on those entities that
take risk; thus this Article includes provisions requiring reporting of Subcontractors
and Downstream Subcontractors that assume responsibility for taking that risk and
managing the health care of a portion of assigned lives.
This Article articulates DHCS’ commitment in moving the delivery system towards
value-based payment. Contractors are to report on the proportion of spend that is
tied to value. In addition, Contractors are to implement F inancial Arrangements
that link payments to value in the form of higher quality of care, better health care
outcomes, and lower cost of care. Such arrangements include, but are not limited
to, incentive payment arrangements that reward P roviders for high or improved
performance on selected m easures or benchmarks. Finally, Contractors are to
report on the proportion of spend on P rimary Care specifically in an effort to
encourage investment in Primary Care as appropriate.
[[page 154]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 154 of 642
3.1 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements, and Contractor’s Oversight Duties
3.1.1 Overview of Contractor’s Duties and Obligations
3.1.2 DHCS Approval of Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
3.1.3 Contractor’s Duty to Disclose All Delegated Relationships and to Submit
Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan
3.1.4 Contractor’s Duty to Ensure Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor,
and Network Provider Compliance
3.1.5 Requirements for Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
3.1.6 Financial Viability of Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and
Network Providers
3.1.7 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Federally Qualified Health
Centers and Rural Health Clinics
3.1.8 Network Provider Agreements with Safety-Net Providers
3.1.9 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Local Health Departments
3.1.10 Nondiscrimination in Provider Contracts
3.1.11 Public Records
3.1.12 Requirement to Post
[[page 155]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 155 of 642
3.1 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements, and Contractor’s Oversight Duties
3.1.1 Overview of Contractor’s Duties and Obligations
A. Contractor is fully responsible for all duties and obligations set forth in this
Contract. However, Contractor may enter into agreements with other
individuals, groups, or entities to fulfill its obligations and duties under the
Contract, including Network Provider Agreements and Subcontractor
Agreements. Some individuals, groups, or entities may be a combination
of Network Provider, Subcontractor, and/or Downstream Subcontractor, in
which case they would need to comply with the requirements for Network
Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements, as applicable. Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors may enter into agreements to fulfill their
obligations and duties under the Contract, in which case they would need
to comply with the requirements of Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements or Network Provider Agreements, as applicable.
B. Contractor must ensure that all Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors comply with all Contract requirements related to the
delegated functions undertaken by each Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor. Contractor remains fully responsible for the performance of
all duties and obligations it delegates to Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors. To ensure Subcontractor’s and Downstream
Subcontractor’s compliance, Contractor must, at a minimum, do the
following:
1) Include all Contract duties and obligations relating to the delegated
duties in the Subcontractor Agreement;
2) Ensure Subcontractor includes all Contract obligations relating to
the delegated duties in all Downstream Subcontractor Agreements;
3) Provide policies and procedures to Subcontractors applicable to the
delegated functions and ensure Subcontractor provides the
relevant policies and procedures as applicable to delegated
functions;
Monitor and oversee all delegated functions, including those that
may flow down to Downstream Subcontractors; and
4) Provide to DHCS a delegation reporting and compliance plan, as
set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.3 (Contractor’s
Duty to Disclose All Delegated Relationships and to Submit
Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan).
[[page 156]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 156 of 642
C. Contractor must ensure that Network Providers comply with all applicable
Contract requirements and all requirements set forth in their Network
Provider Agreements (See Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.5.A
(Network Provider Agreement Requirements).
3.1.2 DHCS Approval of Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
A. Submission and Approval of Network Provider Agreements Templates
1) Contractor must submit to DHCS all Network Provider Agreement
templates, and any proposed amendments thereto, for review and
approval before use. The contents of the Network Provider
Agreement templates are set forth in All Plan Letter (APL) 19-001.
2) Within 60 calendar days of receipt, DHCS will make all reasonable
efforts to approve in writing the use of all Network Provider
Agreement templates. DHCS will provide Contractor with a written
explanation indicating whether the template is approved,
disapproved, or an estimated date for completion of DHCS’ review.
If DHCS does not complete its review of Network Provider
Agreement templates within 60 calendar days of receipt, or within
DHCS’ estimated date of completion, whichever is later, Contractor
may elect to implement or use the material at Contractor’s sole risk
and subject to possible subsequent disapproval by DHCS.
B. Submission and Approval of Subcontractor Agreements and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements Templates
1) Contractor must submit to DHCS all Subcontractor Agreement and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreement templates, and any
amendments thereto, as follows:
a) For Fully Delegated Subcontractors and Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors, Contractor must submit all
Subcontractor Agreement and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreement templates and any amendments thereto, to
DHCS for review and approval before use. Contractor must
also file with DHCS all executed Subcontractor Agreements
with Fully Delegated Subcontractors and all executed
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractors.
b) For Partially Delegated Subcontractors and Administrative
Subcontractors, and Downstream Partially Delegated
[[page 157]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 157 of 642
Subcontractors and Downstream Administrative
Subcontractors, Contractor must submit all Subcontractor
Agreements and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
templates, and any amendments thereto, to DHCS for
review and approval prior to execution of the Subcontractor
Agreement or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement.
2) Within 60 calendar days of receipt, DHCS will make all reasonable
efforts to approve in writing the use of Subcontractor Agreement
and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement templates submitted by
Contractor. DHCS will provide Contractor with a written explanation
indicating whether the template is approved, disapproved, or an
estimated date for completion of DHCS review. If DHCS does not
complete its review of the submitted material within 60 calendar
days of receipt, or by DHCS estimated date of completion,
whichever is later, Contractor may elect to implement or use the
template at Contractor’s sole risk and subject to possible
subsequent disapproval by DHCS.
3.1.3 Contractor’s Duty to Disclose All Delegated Relationships and to Submit
Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan
A. Content of Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan
Contractor must report its delegation and compliance plan using the
templates provided in Exhibit J (Delegation Reporting and Compliance
Plan), which includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1) All Contractor’s contractual relationships with Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors;
2) Contractor’s oversight responsibilities for all delegated obligations;
and
3) How Contractor intends to oversee all delegated activities,
including, but not limited to, details regarding key personnel who
will be overseeing each delegated function.
B. Timing of Submission
Contractor must submit its delegation reporting and compliance plan to
DHCS as follows:
1) During the operational readiness period;
[[page 158]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 158 of 642
2) Annually, whether or not changes have been made to its delegation
structure; and
3) Anytime there is a change in the delegation reporting and
compliance plan, including but not limited to a change in a
Subcontractor and/or a change in the scope of the delegation.
The report must be submitted within 30 calendar days from either the beginning
of the annual reporting period or any change, as identified above.
3.1.4 Contractor’s Duty to Ensure Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor,
and Network Provider Compliance
Contractor must maintain policies and procedures approved by DHCS to ensure
that Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors fully
comply with all applicable terms and conditions of this Contract and all duties
delegated to Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors as set forth above.
Contractor must evaluate each prospective Network Provider’s, Subcontractor’s,
and Downstream Subcontractor’s ability to perform the contracted services or
functions, must oversee and remain responsible and accountable for any
services or functions undertaken by a Network Provider, Subcontractor, or
Downstream Subcontractor, and must meet all applicable requirements set forth
in State and federal law, regulation, any APLs or DHCS guidance, and this
Contract.
3.1.5 Requirements for Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
A. Network Provider Agreement Requirements
Network Provider Agreements must contain the following provisions:
1) Specification of the Covered Services to be ordered, referred, or
rendered;
2) The term of the agreement, including the beginning and ending
dates as well as methods of extension, renegotiation, phaseout,
and termination, if any;
3) Full disclosure of the method and amount of compensation or other
consideration to be received by Network Provider;
4) Specification that the agreement will be governed by and construed
in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations governing
the Contract, including but not limited to, Knox-Keene Health Care
Service Plan Act of 1975 (KKA), Health and Safety Code (H&S)
[[page 159]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 159 of 642
section 1340 et seq. (unless excluded under this Contract); Welfare
and Institutions Code (W&I) sections 14000 and 14200 et seq.; 28
California Code of Regulations (CCR) section 1300.43 et seq.; and
22 CCR sections 53800 et seq., 22 CCR sections 53900 et seq;
5) Network Provider will comply with all applicable requirements of the
DHCS Medi-Cal Managed Care Program, including but not limited
to, all applicable federal and State Medicaid and Medi-Cal laws,
regulations, sub-regulatory guidance, APLs, and provisions of this
Contract;
6) Network Provider will submit to Contractor, either directly or through
a Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor as applicable,
complete, accurate, reasonable, and timely Encounter Data and
Provider Data, and any other reports or data as requested by
Contractor, in order for Contractor to meet its data reporting
requirements to DHCS;
7) Network Provider will maintain and make available to DHCS, upon
request, copies of all contracts it enters into related to ordering,
referring, or rendering Covered Services under the Network
Provider Agreement, and will ensure that all such contracts are in
writing;
8) Network Provider will make all of its premises, facilities, equipment,
books, records, contracts, and computer and other electronic
systems pertaining to the Covered Services ordered, referred, or
rendered under the terms of the Network Provider Agreement,
available for the purpose of an audit, inspection, evaluation,
examination or copying, including but not limited to Access
Requirements and State’s Right to Monitor, as set forth in Exhibit E,
Section 1.22 (Inspection and Audit of Records and Facilities), as
follows:
a) In accordance with inspections and audits, as directed by
DHCS, The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS) Inspector General, the Comptroller General,
Department of Justice (DOJ), the Department of Managed
Health Care (DMHC), or their designees; and
b) At all reasonable times at Network Provider’s place of
business or at such other mutually agreeable location in
California.
[[page 160]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 160 of 642
9) Network Provider will maintain all of its books and records,
including Encounter Data, in accordance with good business
practices and generally accepted accounting principles for a term
annual of at least ten years from the final date of the Contract
period or from the date of completion of any audit, whichever is
later;
10) Network Provider will timely gather, preserve and provide to DHCS,
CMS, the Division of Medi-Cal Fraud and Elder Abuse (DMFEA),
and any authorized State or federal regulatory agencies, any
records in Network Provider’s possession, in accordance with
Exhibit E, Section 1.27 (Litigation Support);
11) Network Provider will assist Contractor, or if applicable a
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor, in the transfer of
Member’s care in accordance with Exhibit E, Section 1.17
(Phaseout Requirements) in the event of Contract termination, or in
the event of termination of the Network Provider Agreement for any
reason;
12) Network Providers will be terminated, or subject to other actions,
fines, and/or penalties, if DHCS or Contractor determine that the
Network Provider has not performed satisfactorily;
13) Network Provider will hold harmless both the State and Members in
the event Contractor or, if applicable a Subcontractor or
Downstream Subcontractor, cannot or will not pay for Covered
Services ordered, referred, or rendered by Network Provider
pursuant to the Network Provider Agreement;
14) Network Provider will not bill a Member for Medi-Cal Covered
Services;
15) Contractor must inform Network Provider of prospective
requirements added by State or federal law or DHCS related to this
Contract that impact obligations undertaken through the Network
Provider Agreement before the requirement would be effective, and
agreement by Network Provider to comply with the new
requirements within 30 calendar days of the effective date, unless
otherwise instructed by DHCS;
16) Network Provider must ensure that cultural competency/humility,
sensitivity, Health Equity, and diversity training is provided for
employees and staff at key points of contact with Members in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11.C.
(Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees);
[[page 161]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 161 of 642
17) Network Provider must provide interpreter services for Members
and comply with language assistance standards developed
pursuant to H&S section 1367.04;
18) Network Provider must notify Contractor, and Contractor’s
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor, within ten Working
Days of any suspected Fraud, Waste, or Abuse and a provision that
allows Contractor to share such information with DHCS in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.3.2.D
(Contractor’s Reporting Obligations) and Subsection 1.3.2.D.6
(Confidentiality);
19) Network Provider must report to Contractor, or Contractor’s
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor, when it has received
an overpayment; return the overpayment to Contractor, or
Contractor’s Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor, within 60
calendar days of the date the overpayment was identified; and
notify Contractor, or Contractor’s Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor, in writing of the reason for the overpayment in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.3.6
(Treatment of Overpayment Recoveries) and 42 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) section 438.608(d)(2);
20) Confirmation of Network Provider’s right to all protections afforded
them under the Health Care Providers’ Bill of Rights, including, but
not limited to Network Provider’s right to access Contractor’s
dispute resolution mechanism and submit a Grievance pursuant to
H&S section 1367(h)(1).
21) Network Provider must execute the California Health and Human
Services Data Exchange Framework data sharing agreement
pursuant to H&S section 130290.
B. Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement Requirements
Subcontractor Agreements and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
must contain the following provisions, as applicable to the specific
obligations and functions that Contractor delegates in the Subcontractor
Agreement or that the Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor
delegates in the Downstream Subcontractor Agreement:
1) Specification of Contractor’s obligations and functions undertaken
by the Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor;
[[page 162]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 162 of 642
2) The term of the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement, including the beginning and ending
dates as well as methods of extension, renegotiation, phaseout,
and termination, if any;
3) Full disclosure of the method and amount of compensation or other
consideration to be received by Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor per unit of service;
4) Specification that the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement and amendments as set forth in this
Exhibit A, Subsection 3.1.2 (DHCS Approval of Network Provider
Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements);
5) Subcontractor’s assignment or delegation of an obligation or
responsibility under a Subcontractor Agreement to any
Downstream Subcontractor is void unless prior written approval is
obtained from DHCS;
6) Downstream Subcontractor’s assignment or delegation of an
obligation or responsibility under a Downstream Subcontractor
Agreement to any Downstream Subcontractor is void unless prior
written approval is obtained from DHCS;
7) Specification that the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement is governed by and construed in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations governing the
Contract, including but not limited to 42 CFR section 438.230; KKA,
H&S section 1340 et seq. (unless otherwise excluded under this
Contract); 28 CFR section 1300.43 et seq.; W&I sections 14000
and 14200 et seq.; and 22 CCR sections 53800 et seq., 22 CCR
sections 53900 et seq;
8) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must comply with
all applicable requirements of the DHCS Medi-Cal Managed Care
Program, pertaining to the obligations and functions undertaken
pursuant to the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement, including but not limited to, all applicable
federal and State Medicaid and Medi-Cal laws, regulations, sub-
regulatory guidance, APLs, and the provisions of this Contract;
9) Language comparable to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
3.3.16 (Emergency Services and Post-Stabilization Care Services),
for those Subcontractors or Downstream Subcontractors obligated
to reimburse Providers of Emergency Services;
[[page 163]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 163 of 642
10) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must submit to
Contractor, either directly or through a Subcontractor or
Downstream Subcontractor as applicable, complete, accurate,
reasonable, and timely Encounter Data and Provider Data, and any
other reports and data as requested by Contractor, in order for
Contractor to meet its reporting requirements to DHCS;
11) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must comply with
all monitoring provisions of this Contract and any monitoring
requests by DHCS;
12) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must maintain and
make available to DHCS, upon request, copies of all contracts it
enters into related to the performance of the obligations and
functions it undertakes pursuant to the Subcontractor Agreement,
and to ensure that such contracts are in writing;
13) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must make all of
their premises, facilities, equipment, books, records, contracts,
computer and other electronic systems pertaining to the obligations
and functions undertaken pursuant to the Subcontractor Agreement
or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement, available for the purpose
of an audit, inspection, evaluation, examination or copying,
including but not limited to Access Requirements and State’s Right
to Monitor, as set forth in Exhibit E, Section 1.22 (Inspection and
Audit of Records and Facilities), as follows:
a) In accordance with inspections and audits, as directed by
DHCS, CMS, U.S. DHHS Inspector General, the Comptroller
General, DOJ, DMHC, or their designees; and
b) At all reasonable times at Subcontractor’s or Downstream
Subcontractor’s place of business or at such other mutually
agreeable location in California.
14) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must maintain all of
its books and records, including Encounter Data, in accordance
with good business practices and generally accepted accounting
principles for a term of at least ten years from the final date of the
Contract period or from the date of completion of any audit,
whichever is later;
15) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must timely gather,
preserve, and provide to DHCS, CMS, DMFEA, and any authorized
State or federal regulatory agencies, any records in Subcontractor’s
[[page 164]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 164 of 642
possession, in accordance with Exhibit E, Section 1.27 (Litigation
Support);
16) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must assist
Contractor as applicable in the transfer of the Member’s care as
needed, and in accordance with Exhibit E, Section 1.17 (Phaseout
Requirements), in the event of Contract termination, or in the event
of termination of the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement for any reason;
17) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must notify DHCS
in the event the Subcontractor Agreement or any Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement is amended or terminated for any reason;
18) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must hold
harmless both the State and Members in the event Contractor, or
another Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor as applicable,
cannot or will not pay for the obligations and functions undertaken
pursuant to the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement;
19) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must participate
and cooperate in Contractor’s Quality Improvement System as
applicable;
20) If Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractors takes on Quality
Improvement activities, the Subcontractor Agreement or
Downstream Subcontractor Agreement must include those
provisions stipulated in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.5
(Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Quality
Improvement Activities);
21) To the extent Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor
undertakes coordination of care obligations and functions for
Members, an agreement to share with Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractor any utilization data that DHCS has
provided to Contractor, and agreement by the Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractors to receive the utilization data provided
and use it solely for the purpose of Member Care Coordination;
22) Contractor must inform Subcontractor of prospective requirements
added by federal or State law or DHCS related to this Contract that
impact obligations and functions undertaken pursuant to the
Subcontractor Agreement before the requirement is effective, and
Subcontractor’s agreement to comply with the new requirements
[[page 165]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 165 of 642
within 30 calendar days of the effective date, unless otherwise
instructed by DHCS;
23) Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractors must inform the
Downstream Subcontractor taking on delegated functions of
prospective requirements added by federal or State law or DHCS
related to this Contract that impact obligations and functions
undertaken pursuant to the Downstream Subcontractor Agreement
before the requirement is effective, and the agreement of the
Downstream Subcontractor taking on delegated functions to comply
with the new requirements within 30 calendar days of the effective
date, unless otherwise instructed by DHCS;
24) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must ensure that
cultural competency/humility, sensitivity, Health Equity, and
diversity training is provided for Subcontractor’s and Downstream
Subcontractor’s staff at key points of contact with Members in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11.C.
(Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees);
25) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must provide
interpreter services for Members and comply with language
assistance standards developed pursuant to H&S section 1367.04;
26) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must notify
Contractor within ten Working Days of any suspected Fraud,
Waste, or Abuse and a provision that allows Contractor to share
such information with DHCS in accordance with Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 1.3.2.D (Contractor’s Reporting
Obligations) and Subsection 1.3.2.D.6) (Confidentiality);
27) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must report directly
to Contractor, or through the Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor, as applicable, when it has received an
overpayment; return the overpayment to Contractor within 60
calendar days after the date the overpayment was identified; and
notify Contractor in writing of the reason for the overpayment in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.3.6
(Treatment of Overpayment Recoveries) and 42 CFR section
438.608(d)(2);
28) Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors must perform the
obligations and functions of Contractor undertaken pursuant to the
Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream Subcontractor
Agreement, including but not limited to reporting responsibilities, in
[[page 166]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 166 of 642
compliance with Contractor’s obligations under this Contract in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.230(c)(1)(ii); and
29) Express agreement and acknowledgement by Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractors that DHCS is a direct beneficiary of
the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream Subcontractor
Agreement with respect to all obligations and functions undertaken
pursuant to the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement, and that DHCS may directly enforce any
and all provisions of the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement.
30) Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors must execute the
California Health and Human Services Data Exchange Framework
data sharing agreement, if applicable, pursuant to H&S section
130290.
31) Specification of Subcontractors’, including Downstream
Subcontractors’, MLR reporting and remittance obligations pursuant
to 42 CFR sections 438.8 and 438.230(c) and Paragraph 11 of the
1915(b) CalAIM SpecialTerms and Conditions (STCs), which
include, but are not limited to, the requirements in:
a) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.A.2 (Medical Loss
Ratio) for the CalAIM 1915(b) STC downstream
requirements and four-part test;
b) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.B (Medical Loss
Ratio) for the MLR Experience Defined;
c) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsections 1.2.5. C and D
(Medical Loss Ratio) for the Materiality Threshold;
d) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5. E (Medical Loss
Ratio) for the MLR numerator and incurred claims for
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors;
e) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.E.1.b.iii (Medical
Loss Ratio) for remittances received by Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors must be deducted from
incurred claims;
f) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.E.1.e.iii (Medical
Loss Ratio) for remittances paid by Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors must be excluded from incurred
claims;
[[page 167]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 167 of 642
g) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.F (Medical Loss
Ratio) for MLR denominator;
h) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.G (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
allocation of expenses;
i) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.H (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
credibility adjustments;
j) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.I (Medical Loss
Ratio) for materiality threshold;
k) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.J (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
MLR reporting at Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor arrangement level by county or rating region;
l) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.K (Medical Loss
Ratio) for general MLR reporting requirement imposed on
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors;
m) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.K.4 (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
reporting requirements on downstream entities that accept
financial risk;
n) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.K.5 (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
MLR submission accuracy attestation;
o) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.K.6 (Medical Loss
Ratio) for requirements for Subcontractor and Downstream
MLR submissions and oversight requirements;
p) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.M (Medical Loss
Ratio) for newer experience exemptions for Subcontractors
and Downstream Subcontractors;
q) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.O (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor re-
reporting requirements following a retroactive change to the
Capitation Payments for a MLR reporting year;
[[page 168]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 168 of 642
r) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.P (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
remittance requirements; and
s) Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5.Q (Medical Loss
Ratio) for Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
audit and record retention requirements.
3.1.6 Financial Viability of Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and
Network Providers
Contractor must maintain a system to evaluate and monitor the financial viability
of all Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors that
accept financial risk for the provision of Covered Services including, but not
limited to, Medi-Cal managed care plans, independent Physician/Provider
associations, medical groups, hospitals, risk-bearing organizations as defined by
28 CCR section 1300.75.4(b), Federal Qualified Health Centers (FQHC), and
other clinics.
3.1.7 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Federally Qualified Health
Centers and Rural Health Clinics
Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements with FQHCs, Rural Health Clinics (RHCs), and other
clinics must meet the requirements of Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsections
3.1.5.A and B (Network Provider Agreement Requirements and Subcontractor
and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement Requirements), above, and the
reimbursement requirements set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
3.3.7 (Federally Qualified Health Center, Rural Health Center, and Indian Health
Care Provider). Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, or
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with FQHCs, RHCs, and other clinics
also must contain a provision stating that any negotiated and agreed-upon rate
with an FQHC, RHC, or other clinic constitutes complete reimbursement and
payment in full for the Covered Services rendered to a Member.
3.1.8 Network Provider Agreements with Safety-Net Providers
A. Except as provided in subdivisions (1), (2), or (3), Contractor must offer a
Network Provider Agreement to, and maintain a Network Provider
Agreement with, any Safety-Net Provider physically located and operating
within Contractor’s contracted geographic service areas if the Safety-Net
Provider agrees to provide its applicable scope of services under the
same terms and conditions that Contractor requires of other similar
Providers.
[[page 169]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 169 of 642
1) If a Safety-Net Provider is no longer willing to accept a Network
Provider Agreement on the same terms and conditions required of
other similar Providers, and Contractor elects to terminate or not
renew the Network Provider Agreement as a result, Contractor
must notify DHCS of its intent to terminate or not renew that
Network Provider Agreement with the applicable Safety-Net
Provider at least 60 calendar days prior to the effective date of the
intended Network Provider Agreement termination or non-renewal.
2) If Contractor determines that the Safety-Net Provider has engaged
in Fraud, Waste, or Abuse of the Medi-Cal program; that there are
quality of care concerns relating to the Safety-Net Provider’s
services; or that the Safety-Net Provider has materially breached its
Network Provider Agreement, and Contractor elects to terminate or
not renew the Network Provider Agreement as a result, Contractor
must notify DHCS of its intent to terminate or not renew that
Network Provider Agreement with the applicable Safety-Net
Provider at least 60 calendar days prior to the effective date of the
intended Network Provider Agreement termination or non-renewal.
3) If DHCS or Contractor determines that the health or welfare of a
Medi-Cal Member is threatened by the Provider, Contractor may
terminate or not renew the Network Provider Agreement with the
applicable Safety-Net Provider immediately, but Contractor must
notify DHCS and the Safety-Net Provider of the termination or non-
renewal concurrently.
4) If the license of the Safety-Net Provider is revoked or suspended,
Contractor must terminate the Network Provider Agreement with
the applicable Safety-Net Provider immediately upon discovery of
such revocation or suspension, but Contractor must notify DHCS
and the Safety-Net Provider of the termination concurrently.
3.1.9 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Local Health Departments
A. Contractor must negotiate in good faith and execute Network Provider
Agreements and Subcontractor Agreements, as appropriate, with the
Local Health Department (LHD) in each county within Contractor’s Service
Area for the following public health services:
1) Family Planning Services, as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 3.3.9 (Non-Contracting Family Planning Providers);
2) Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) services, as specified in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.10 (Sexually Transmitted
[[page 170]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 170 of 642
Disease), including diagnosis and treatment of the following:
syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, herpes simplex, chancroid,
trichomoniasis, human papilloma virus, non-gonococcal urethritis,
lymphogranuloma venereum, and granuloma inguinal;
3) Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) testing and counseling as
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.11 (Human
Immunodeficiency Virus Testing and Counseling); and
4) Immunizations as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
3.3.12 (Immunizations).
B. Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with LHDs must specify the
scope and responsibilities of both parties in the provision of services to
Members, billing and reimbursements, reporting responsibilities, and how
services are to be coordinated between the LHD and Contractor, including
exchange of medical information as necessary. Network Provider
Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements must also meet the requirements described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.5 (Requirements for Network Provider
Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements).
3.1.10 Nondiscrimination in Provider Contracts
Contractor must not discriminate against Providers, in connection with the
participation, reimbursement, or indemnification of any Provider, who is acting
within the scope of practice of their license or certification under applicable State
law, solely on the basis of that license or certification. If Contractor declines to
include individual or groups of Providers in its Network, it must give the affected
Providers written notice of the reason for its decision. Contractor’s Provider
selection policies must not discriminate against Providers that serve high-risk
populations or specialize in conditions requiring costly treatment. Upon request,
Contractor must provide to DHCS its selection of Providers chosen to meet the
need of Contractor’s Members. This section will not be construed to require
Contractor to contract with Providers beyond the number necessary to meet the
needs of Contractor’s Members, preclude Contractor from using different
reimbursement amounts for different specialties or for different practitioners in
the same specialty, or preclude Contractor from establishing measures that are
designed to maintain quality of services and control costs and is consistent with
Contractor’s responsibilities to Members.
3.1.11 Public Records
[[page 171]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 171 of 642
To the extent DHCS receives Contractor’s Network Provider Agreements,
Subcontractor Agreements, or Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, these
agreements and all information received in accordance with these agreements
will be public records on file with DHCS, except as specifically exempted in
statute. The names of the officers and owners of the Network Provider,
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor; stockholders owning more than 5
percent of the stock issued by the Network Provider, Subcontractor or
Downstream Subcontractor; and major creditors holding more than 5 percent of
the debt of the Network Provider, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor
must be attached to the Network Provider Agreement, Subcontractor Agreement,
or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement at the time that agreement is
submitted to DHCS.
3.1.12 Requirement to Post
Contractor must post on its website a summary of its delegation model that
outlines how it delegates obligations and duties of this Contract to Fully
Delegated Subcontractors, Partially Delegated Subcontractors, Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractors, and Downstream Partially Delegated
Subcontractors.
[[page 172]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 172 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
3.2 Provider Relations
3.2.1 Exclusivity
3.2.2 Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism
3.2.3 Out-of-Network Provider Relations
3.2.4 Contractor’s Provider Manual
3.2.5 Network Provider Training
3.2.6 Emergency Department Protocols
3.2.7 Prohibited Punitive Action Against the Provider
3.2.8 Submittal of Inpatient Days Information
[[page 173]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 173 of 642
3.2 Provider Relations
3.2.1 Exclusivity
Contractor must not, by use of any exclusivity provision, clause, agreement, nor
in any other way, prohibit any Network Provider from providing services to other
persons enrolled in Medi-Cal who are not Contractor’s Members.
3.2.2 Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism
In accordance with Health and Safety Code (H&S) section 1367(h)(1), Contractor
must have a fast, fair, and cost-effective Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism
in place for Network Providers and out-of-Network Providers to submit disputes.
A. Contractor must have a formal procedure to accept, acknowledge, and
resolve Network Provider and out-of-Network Provider disputes. The
Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism must occur in accordance with
the timeframes set forth in H&S sections 1371 and 1371.35 for both
Network Providers and out-of-Network Providers. Any Provider of Medi-
Cal services may submit a dispute to Contractor regarding:
1) The authorization or denial of a service;
2) The processing of a payment or non-payment of a claim by
Contractor; or
3) The timeliness of the reimbursement on an uncontested Clean
Claim and any interest Contractor is required to pay on claims
reimbursement per APL-23-020.
B. Contractor’s Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism must be set forth in
all Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements.
C. Contractor must inform all Network Providers, out-of-Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors that provide services to
Contractor’s Members of its Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism,
regardless of contracting status.
D. Contractor must resolve Network Provider and out-of-Network Provider
disputes within the timeframes set forth in H&S section 1371.35 of receipt
of the dispute, including supporting documentation.
E. Contractor must submit a Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism report
annually to DHCS which includes information on the number of Providers
who utilized the Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism and a summary
[[page 174]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 174 of 642
of the disposition of those disputes, in accordance with H&S section
1367(h)(3). This report must be delineated by Network Providers and out-
of-Network Providers, and by Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor.
F. On an annual basis, Contractor must assess the Network Providers and
out-of-Network Providers that utilize the Provider Dispute Resolution
Mechanism to identify trends and systemic issues. Contractor must submit
the results of its annual assessment to DHCS with discussion on how it is
addressing trends and systemic issues identified based on the
assessment.
3.2.3 Out-of-Network Provider Relations
A. Contractor must develop and maintain protocols for payment of claims to
out-of-Network Providers, and for communicating and interacting with out-
of-Network Providers regarding services and claims payment.
B. Contractor must provide its clinical protocols and evidence-based practice
guidelines governing Prior Authorization, Utilization Management (UM)
and Retrospective Review to all out-of-Network Providers providing
services to its Members. Contractor must arrange to provide these
protocols and guidelines at the time that Contractor enters into an
agreement with an out-of-Network Provider or anytime an out-of-Network
Provider submits a claim for services provided to Contractor’s Members.
3.2.4 Contractor’s Provider Manual
Contractor must issue a Provider manual to Network Providers, Subcontractors,
and Downstream Subcontractors that includes information regarding Medi-Cal
Covered Services and responsibilities for the provision of services including
Basic Population Health Management (Basic PHM); Care Coordination for
Excluded Services; policies and procedures; quality assurance; improvement and
monitoring; clinical protocols governing Prior Authorization and UM; timeliness
standards; Credentialing; prohibited claims; statutes; regulations; telephone
access; special requirements; data reporting; and the Member Grievance,
Appeal, and State Hearing process. Contractor must ensure the most updated
Provider manual is available through Provider portals, the internet, or upon
request. When updates are made to the Provider manual, Contractor must notify
Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors.
Contractor must solicit feedback from Contractor committees including but not
limited to the Community Advisory Committee (CAC) and Quality Improvement
Committee (QIC), to inform the development of Contractor Provider manual and
clarify new and revised policies and procedures contained therein.
[[page 175]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 175 of 642
Contractor must conduct an annual review of its Provider manual and document
that the review has been conducted by the appropriate Contractor committees
including the QIC
. Contractor must update its Provider manual annually or at any
time to ensure that the information reflects current requirements.
Contractor’s Provider manual must include and inform Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors of the following Member rights
information, as set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.1 (Member
Services):
A. Member’s right to file Grievances and Appeals, and the requirements and
timeframes for filing, including the right to have the Member’s Medical
Record and to have an Authorized Representative (AR) or Provider appeal
on the Member’s behalf, with written consent from the Member;
B. Availability of assistance in filing a Grievance, Appeal, or State Hearing;
C. Toll-free numbers to file oral Grievances and Appeals;
D. Member’s right to request continuation of benefits during an Appeal or
State Hearing;
E. Member’s right to a State Hearing, how to obtain a State Hearing, and
representation rules at a State Hearing; and
F. Member’s right to an Independent Medical Review (IMR), if applicable.
3.2.5 Network Provider Training
Contractor must ensure that all Network Providers receive training regarding the
Medi-Cal Managed Care program to ensure they operate in full compliance with
the Contract and all applicable federal and State statutes, regulations, All Plan
Letters (APLs), and Policy Letters (PLs). Contractor must conduct training for all
Network Providers. Contractor must start training within ten Working Days and
complete training within 30 Working Days after Contractor places a newly
contracted Network Provider on active status. Contractor may conduct Network
Provider training online or in-person. Contractor must maintain records of
attendance to validate that Network Providers received training on a bi-annual
basis.
A. Contractor must ensure that Network Provider training includes education
on Covered Services, policies and procedures for clinical protocols
governing Prior Authorization and UM, and carved out services including,
how to refer to and coordinate care with agencies, programs and third
parties with which Contractor has a Memorandum of Understanding
(MOU) as required under this Contract.
[[page 176]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 176 of 642
B. Contractor must conduct ongoing training, at least once every two years,
for Network Providers on required preventive healthcare services,
including Early Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Testing (EPSDT)
services for Members less than 21 years of age; appropriate medical
record documentation; and coding requirements. This must include
training on existing Contractor data collection and reporting requirements
and Quality Improvement programs to ensure required preventive services
are offered and provided. This training also must include, but is not limited
to, training on Population Health Management (PHM) program
requirements (i.e., care management services) including referrals, health
education resources, and Provider and Member incentive programs.
C. Contractor must immediately notify Network Providers when changes to its
existing policies and procedures impact Network Providers’ provision of
Medi-Cal Covered Services to Members and not wait until the next
biennial mandatory training.
D. Contractor’s training must educate Network Providers on Member access,
including compliance with appointment waiting time standards and
ensuring telephone, translation, and language access is available for
Members during hours of operation. Training must also include education
on secure methods for sharing information between Contractor, Network
Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, Members, and
other healthcare professionals. This must include training on ensuring
Providers have accurate contact information for the Member and all
Network Providers involved in the Member’s care. Contractor must also
provide training on how to refer and coordinate care for Members who
need access to Excluded Services.
E. Contractor must ensure that Network Provider biennial mandatory training
includes information on all Member rights specified in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 5.1 (Member Services), and diversity, equity and
inclusion training (sensitivity, diversity, communication skills, and cultural
competency/humility training) as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.11.C. (Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees).
This process must also include an educational program for Network
Providers regarding health needs to include but not be limited to, the
Seniors and Persons with Disabilities (SPD) population, Members with
chronic conditions, Members with Specialty Mental Health Service
(SMHS) needs, Members with Substance Use Disorder (SUD) needs,
Members with intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (DDs), and
Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs (CYSHCN). Trainings
must include Social Drivers of Health (SDOH) and disparity impacts on
Members’ health care. Attendance records must be reviewed and
maintained by Contractor’s Health Equity officer.
[[page 177]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 177 of 642
F. Trainings must be reviewed by the appropriate Contractor committees,
including Contractor’s board of director’s compliance and oversight
committee and QIC, routinely, but not less than biennially, to ensure
consistency and accuracy with current requirements and Contractor’s
policies and procedures.
G. In compliance with 42 Code of Regulations (CFR) section 438.236(b),
Contractor must ensure that practice guidelines are based on valid and
reliable clinical evidence or a consensus of Providers in that particular
field, consider the needs of Contractor's Members, are adopted in
consultation with Network Providers, and are reviewed and updated
periodically as appropriate. In addition to Network Provider training,
Contractor must disseminate their practice guidelines to all affected
Providers.
3.2.6 Emergency Department Protocols
Contractor must develop and maintain protocols for communicating and
interacting with emergency departments in and out of its Service Area.
Contractor’s protocols must be distributed to all emergency departments in the
Service Area and must include, at a minimum, the following:
A. All information on telephone or other secure methods of communicating
with Contractor’s triage and advice systems;
B. Contact information for Contractor’s designated contact person
responsible for coordinating Emergency Services who is available 24
hours a day for the coordination of Emergency Services and Post-
Stabilization Care Services;
C. Written referral procedures (including after-hours instruction) that
emergency department personnel can provide to Members who present at
the emergency department for Non-Emergency services;
D. Procedures for emergency departments to report Contractor’s system
and/or protocol failures and Contractor’s processes for correcting
deficiencies when failures occur;
E. Procedures for the authorization and payment of Medically Necessary
Post-Stabilization Care Services consistent with 42 CFR section 438.114,
APL 19-008, and APL 23-009;
F. Procedures for screening and referral of Members who meet Enhanced
Care Management (ECM) Population of Focus eligibility criteria, especially
[[page 178]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 178 of 642
the Individuals at risk for avoidable hospital or Emergency Department
utilization Population of Focus; and
G. Procedures for screening and referral of Members who meet medical
necessity eligibility criteria for Community Health Workers CHW services.
3.2.7 Prohibited Punitive Action Against the Provider
Contractor is prohibited from taking punitive action against a Provider who either
requests an expedited resolution or supports a Member’s Appeal. Further,
Contractor may not prohibit, or otherwise restrict, a health care professional
acting within their lawful scope of practice, from advising, or advocating on behalf
of, a Member about:
A. The Member’s health status, medical care, treatment options, or
alternative treatment options (including any alternative treatment that may
be self-administered), including obtaining any information the Member
needs in order to decide among all relevant treatment options;
B. The risks, benefits, and consequences of treatment or non-treatment; or
C. The Member’s right to participate in decisions regarding their health care,
including the right to refuse treatment and to express preferences about
future treatment decisions.
3.2.8 Submittal of Inpatient Days Information
Contractor must report hospital inpatient days to DHCS as required by Welfare
and Institutions Code (W&I) section 14105.985(b)(2). Upon DHCS' written
request, Contractor must also provide these reports for the time period and in the
form and manner specified in DHCS' request, within 30 calendar days of receipt
of the request. Contractor must submit additional reports to DHCS, as requested,
for the administration of the Disproportionate Share Hospital program.
[[page 179]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 179 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
3.3 Provider Compensation Arrangements
3.3.1 Compensation and Value Based Arrangements
3.3.2 Capitation Arrangements
3.3.3 Provider Financial Incentive Program Payments
3.3.4 Identification of Responsible Payor
3.3.5 Claims Processing
3.3.6 Prohibited Claims
3.3.7 Federally Qualified Health Center, Rural Health Center, and Indian Health
Care Provider
3.3.8 Non-Contracting Certified Nurse Midwife, Nurse Practitioner, and Licensed
Midwife Providers
3.3.9 Non-Contracting Family Planning Providers
3.3.10 Sexually Transmitted Disease
3.3.11 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Testing and Counseling
3.3.12 Immunizations
3.3.13 Community Based Adult Services
3.3.14 Organ and Bone Marrow Transplants
3.3.15 Long-Term Care Services
3.3.16 Emergency Services and Post-Stabilization Care Services
3.3.17 Provider-Preventable Conditions
3.3.18 Prohibition Against Payment to Excluded Providers
3.3.19 Compliance with Directed Payment Initiatives and Related
Reimbursement Requirements
[[page 180]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 180 of 642
3.3 Provider Compensation Arrangements
3.3.1 Compensation and Value Based Arrangements
A. Except as otherwise specified in this Contract, Contractor may
compensate Providers as Contractor and Provider negotiate and agree.
B. DHCS encourages Contractor to utilize value-based and alternative
payment models to compensate Network Providers, especially for Primary
Care Covered Services, in ways that ensure Provider accountability for
both quality and total cost of care with a focus on population health
management. Contractor must monitor and must report, within 90
calendar days of DHCS’ request, the number or amount, and percent, of
Contractor’s Members, Network Providers, and medical expenditures that
are made under such payment models, separately for hospital services,
professional services, and other services at a minimum.
C. Payment to support Networks based on value: To continue to build and
strengthen Networks based on value, Contractors must support their
Providers through value-based payment models that promote high-quality,
affordable, and equitable care.
On an annual basis, as specified by DHCS, Contractor must report on its
Network payment models using the Health Care Payment Learning and
Action Network Alternative Payment Model (HCP LAN APM) framework
categories as outlined.
D. Effective Primary Care: Contractor must support effective Primary Care
and integrated care through use of alternative payment models, such as
population-based payment and shared savings. Specifically, Contractor
must:
1) Ensure investment in Primary Care service delivery
a) Contractor must report on total Primary Care spend, as
defined by the Integrated Healthcare Association (IHA), and
the percent of spend within each HCP LAN APM Framework
Category. Contractor must report the percentage of spend
within each HCP LAN APM Framework Category as a
percentage of its total spend.
b) Contract must stratify the reporting of Primary Care spend
(and as a percentage of total spend) by age (Children and
youth ages zero to 20; adults ages 21+), by race/ethnicity,
and as requested by DHCS.
[[page 181]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 181 of 642
c) Contractor must work with DHCS and other stakeholders to
analyze the relationship between the percent of spend for
Primary Care services with performance of the overall
delivery system. If the evidence shows that rebalancing to
increase Primary Care spend improves quality or drives
lower total cost of care, DHCS may set a target or floor for
Primary Care spend in future requirements, and Contractor
will be required to meet these targets for minimum Primary
Care spend.
2) Ensure promotion of Primary Care delivery through alternative
payment models
a) As specified by DHCS, Contractor must report on its Primary
Care payment models using the HCP LAN APM Framework
Categories.
b) As specified by DHCS, Contractor must report on an annual
basis the number and percent of its contracted Primary Care
clinicians paid using each HCP LAN APM Framework
Category.
c) A description of Contractor’s payment model for its five
largest medical groups, as defined by the number of
Providers, and how its Primary Care clinicians are paid.
Contractor must adopt and progressively expand the percent
of Primary Care clinicians paid through the HCP LAN APM
Framework Categories of population-based payment
(Category 4) and alternative payment models built on a fee-
for-service structure such as shared savings (Category 3).
3.3.2 Capitation Arrangements
Payments by Contractor to a Network Provider on a capitation basis must be
payable effective the date the Member’s Enrollment is assigned to the Network
Provider. Capitation Payments by Contractor to a Network Provider must be
payable no later than 30 calendar days after the Member Assignment.
3.3.3 Provider Financial Incentive Program Payments
A. Contractor may compensate Providers through financial incentive program
payments, so long as:
1) Financial incentive program payments to Providers are not
designed to induce Providers to reduce or limit Medically
Necessary Covered Services provided to a Member;
[[page 182]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 182 of 642
2) Financial incentive program payments comply with the
requirements of All Plan Letter (APL) 19-005, where applicable; and
3) All financial incentive programs related to this Contract are reported
in the form, manner, and frequency specified by DHCS.
B. Contractor may implement and maintain a physician incentive plan, as
defined in 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 422.208, so long
as:
1) No specific payment is made directly or indirectly under the
physician incentive plan as an inducement to reduce or limit
Medically Necessary Covered Services provided to a Member; and
2) The physician incentive plan complies with the requirements of 42
CFR sections 438.3(i) and 438.10(f)(3).
3.3.4 Identification of Responsible Payor
Contractor must provide information to the DHCS fiscal intermediary that
identifies the payor(s) responsible for reimbursement of Covered Services
provided to a Member. Contractor must identify the Network Provider,
Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor responsible for payment, if
applicable, and the name and telephone number of the Provider responsible for
providing care. Contractor must provide this information upon DHCS’ request and
in a manner prescribed by DHCS.
3.3.5 Claims Processing
Contractor must pay all Clean Claims submitted by Providers in accordance with
this section, unless the Provider and Contractor have agreed in writing to an
alternate payment schedule, subject to the following:
A. Contractor must comply with 42 United States Code (USC) section 1396u-
2(f) and Health and Safety Code (H&S) sections 1371 - 1371.36 and their
implementing regulations. Contractor must be subject to any penalties and
sanctions, including interest at the rate of 15 percent per annum, provided
by law if Contractor fails to meet the standards specified in this section.
B. Contractor is expected to pay Clean Claims within 30 calendar days of
receipt. For the purpose of establishing compliance thresholds, Contractor
must pay at least 90 percent of all Clean Claims from Providers within 30
calendar days of the date of receipt and 99 percent of all Clean Claims
within 90 calendar days. For purposes of calculation, the date of receipt is
considered the date Contractor receives the claim, as indicated by its date
[[page 183]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 183 of 642
stamp on the claim, and the date of payment is considered be the date of
the check or other form of payment. Pursuant to H&S section 1371(a), if
Contractor does not pay a Clean Claim within 45 Working Days of receipt,
it will owe the Provider interest at the rate of 15 percent per annum
beginning on the first day after a 45 Working Day period. For the purposes
of calculating interest, the first day is considered to be the first calendar
day after 45 Working Days following the receipt of the claim. Contractor
must automatically include all accrued interest in any late payment.
C. Contractor must provide direct instruction, training, and technical
assistance to its providers to support information transmission and the
submission of Clean Claims, including bills or invoices submitted by ECM
providers; Community Support providers; Doulas, or other community-
based providers that are unable to submit claims through an electronic file
format. Contractor must make claiming, billing or invoicing guides and
notices readily available to its Providers, including through Provider portals
and/or Provider manuals. Contractor is required to train Network Providers
to effectively use electronic systems to facilitate timely submission of
Clean Claims, equivalent encounters, or bills or invoices.
D. If claims are denied, rejected, or contested in whole or in part, Contractor
must specify the reason(s) for contesting or denying a claim and specify
the additional information necessary to complete the claim as well as
offering technical assistance to remediate deficiencies.
E. Contractor must maintain procedures for pre-payment and post-payment
claims review, including review of any data associated with Providers,
Members, and the Covered Services for which payment is claimed.
F. Contractor must maintain sufficient claims processing, tracking, and
payment systems capability to comply with applicable State and federal
law, regulations, and Contract requirements, to determine the status of
received claims and to provide an Incurred but Not Reported Claim
Estimate as specified by 28 CCR sections 1300.77.1 and 1300.77.2.
3.3.6 Prohibited Claims
A. Contractor must comply with 22 CCR sections 53866, 53220, and 53222
regarding the submission and recovery of claims for services provided
under this Contract. Contractor must ensure that its Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors also comply with 22 CCR sections 53866,
53220, and 53222.
B. Contractor must hold harmless and indemnify Members for Contractor's
debt to Providers for services rendered and billed to Members.
[[page 184]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 184 of 642
3.3.7 Federally Qualified Health Center, Rural Health Center, and Indian Health
Care Provider
A. Reimbursement of Non-Contracting Federally Qualified Health Centers
(FQHCs) and Rural Health Center (RHCs)
If FQHC and RHC services are not available in Contractor’s Network in a
particular county of Contractor’s Service Area, Contractor must reimburse
non-contracting FQHCs and RHCs for Covered Services in that county
provided to Members at a level and amount of payment that is not less
than the level and amount of payment which the entity would make for the
services if the services were furnished by a Provider which is not a FQHC
or RHC.
B. Required Terms and Conditions for Network Provider Agreements with
FQHCs and RHCs
1) Contractor must submit to DHCS, within 30 calendar days of a
request and in the form and manner specified by DHCS,
documentation of the services provided, the reimbursement level,
and amount for each of Contractor’s FQHC and RHC Network
Provider Agreements.
2) Contractor must certify in writing to DHCS within 30 calendar days
of DHCS’ written request that, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions
Code (W&I) sections 14087.325(b) and (d), Contractor’s Network
Provider Agreement terms and conditions with FQHCs and RHCs
are the same as those offered to other Network Providers providing
similar services, and that reimbursement is not less than the level
and amount of payment which the entity would make for the
services if the services were furnished by a Provider which is not a
FQHC or an RHC.
3) Contractor is not required to pay FQHCs and RHCs the Medi-Cal
per-visit rate for that clinic.
4) Contractor must fully cooperate with any DHCS review and audit of
Contractor’s operations and records related to FQHC and RHC
reimbursement to ensure compliance with State and federal law.
5) Contractor must submit any FQHC and RHC Network Provider
Agreements to DHCS for approval in accordance with W&I section
14087.325.
6) To the extent that an Indian Health Care Provider (IHCP) Facility
chooses to participate as an FQHC or RHC, the above
[[page 185]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 185 of 642
requirements in this Paragraph B must apply to a Network Provider
Agreement with an IHCP. Moreover, Contractor must pay any non-
contracted IHCP that qualifies as an FQHC or RHC an amount
equal to what Contractor would pay a contracted FQHC or RHC,
and DHCS must make any additional payment needed to comply
with 42 CFR section 438.14(c).
7) Contractor or its Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors
may enter into financial incentive payment arrangements with
FQHC and RHC Network Providers provided such agreements
meet all applicable conditions of federal and State law and of APL
19-005 including, but not limited to, the following:
a) Contractor must establish and maintain clear, objective
criteria for the financial incentive payments and the
conditions under which payments will be made.
b) The financial incentive payment arrangement must
enumerate specific metrics and/or performance terms for the
FQHC or RHC to attain the financial incentive payment.
c) Contractor must have written agreements in place with the
FQHC or RHC prior to the start of the financial incentive
payment arrangement, including the methodology used to
determine the total incentive payment amount.
d) The financial incentive payments must be similar to, and not
less in amount than, other financial incentive payments
Contractor makes to non-FQHC or non-RHC Network
Providers who are providing similar services.
e) Financial incentive payment arrangements must not result in
payments that are less than the payments made by
Contractor to non-FQHC or non-RHC Network Providers
who are providing similar services.
f) Contractor must evaluate the effectiveness of the financial
incentive payments and adjust or discontinue them if they
are determined ineffective upon evaluation.
g) Contractor must provide to DHCS, upon request, written
agreements for, as well as policies and procedures for
oversight and monitoring of, such financial incentive
payments.
C. Indian Health Care Providers
[[page 186]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 186 of 642
1) Contractor must attempt to contract with each IHCP in its Service
Area as set forth in 22 CCR sections 55120 - 55180. Contractor
must reimburse an IHCP that qualifies as a FQHC but is not a
Network Provider as set forth in 42 CFR section 438.14(c)(1).
2) For services provided to Members who are qualified to receive
services from an IHCP pursuant to the California Medicaid State
Plan, Supplement 6, Attachment 4.19-B, regardless of whether the
IHCP is a Network Provider:
a) Contractor must reimburse IHCP at the most current and
applicable outpatient per-visit rate published in the Federal
Register by the Indian Health Service (IHS) in accordance
with APL 17-020 and APL 21-008.
b) Contractor must ensure compliance with any retroactive
changes to the outpatient per-visit rates published in the
Federal Register by the IHS by appropriately reimbursing
IHCPs in accordance therewith.
c) Contractor must reimburse IHCPs at the Medi-Cal Fee-For-
Service (FFS) Rate for services that, pursuant to the
California Medicaid State Plan, Supplement 6, Attachment
4.19-B, are not eligible for the outpatient per-visit rate
published in the Federal Register by the IHS.
3.3.8 Non-Contracting Certified Nurse Midwife, Nurse Practitioner, and Licensed
Midwife Providers
In accordance with 22 CCR section 51345 et seq. and APL 18-022, if there are
no non-contracting Certified Nurse Midwife (CNM), Nurse Practitioner (NP), or
Licensed Midwife (LM) Providers in Contractor’s Network, Contractor must
reimburse non-contracting CNMs, NPs, or LMs for services provided to Members
at no less than the applicable Medi-Cal FFS Rates. For hospitals, the
requirements of Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.16.A.3 (Emergency
Services), if applicable, apply. For Free Standing Birthing Centers, Contractor
must reimburse non-contracting Free Standing Birthing Centers at no less than
the applicable Medi-Cal FFS Rate. If an appropriately licensed non-contracting
Free Standing Birthing Center is used, Contractor also must pay the Center’s
facility fee.
3.3.9 Non-Contracting Family Planning Providers
Pursuant to federal law, including but not limited to 42 USC sections
1396a(a)(23) and 1396n(b) and 42 CFR section 431.51, Contractor must
[[page 187]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 187 of 642
reimburse non-contracting family planning Providers at no less than the
appropriate Medi-Cal FFS Rate, for services listed in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.8 (Specific Requirements for Access to Programs and Covered
Services), provided to Members of childbearing age to temporarily or
permanently prevent or delay pregnancy.
3.3.10 Sexually Transmitted Disease
Pursuant to federal law, including but not limited to 42 USC sections
1396a(a)(23) and 1396n(b) and 42 CFR section 431.51, Contractor must
reimburse non-contracted family planning Providers, including local health
departments, at no less than the Medi-Cal FFS Rate for the diagnosis and
treatment of a Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) episode, as defined in Policy
Letter (PL) 96-09. Contractor must provide reimbursement only if the STD
treatment Provider provides treatment records or documentation of the Member's
refusal to release Medical Records to Contractor along with billing information.
3.3.11 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Testing and Counseling
Pursuant to federal law, including but not limited to 42 USC sections
1396a(a)(23) and 1396n(b) and 42 CFR section 431.51, Contractor must
reimburse non-contracting family planning Providers, including local health
departments, at no less than the Medi-Cal FFS Rate for Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) testing and counseling in accordance with PL 97-
08. Contractor must provide reimbursement only if such non-contracting family
planning Providers make reasonable efforts to report confidential test results to
Contractor in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, including but not
limited to H&S section 121025 et seq.
3.3.12 Immunizations
Contractor must reimburse local health departments for the administration fee for
immunizations given to Members, in accordance with the terms set forth in APL
18-004, who are not already immunized as of the date of the immunization. The
local health department must provide immunization records when immunization
services are billed to Contractor. Other than local health departments, Contractor
is not obligated to reimburse Providers for immunizations under this provision
unless the Provider enters into an agreement with Contractor.
3.3.13 Community Based Adult Services
Contractor must reimburse Network Providers for Community Based Adult
Services (CBAS) pursuant to a reimbursement structure that must include an all-
inclusive per-Member, per-day of attendance rate, or otherwise be reflective of
the acuity and/or level of care of the Member population served by Network
Providers of CBAS. In accordance with W&I section 14184.201(d)(4), Contractor
[[page 188]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 188 of 642
must reimburse Network Providers of CBAS the amount the Provider could
collect if the Member accessed those services in the FFS delivery system, as
defined by DHCS in the California Medicaid State Plan and other applicable
guidance, including but not limited to guidance issued pursuant to W&I section
14184.102(d), unless Contractor and the Network Provider mutually agree to
reimbursement in a different amount. Contractor may include incentive payment
adjustments and performance and/or quality standards in its rate structure in
paying Network Providers of CBAS.
3.3.14 Organ and Bone Marrow Transplants
In accordance with W&I section 14184.201(d), and for applicable dates of
service, Contractor must reimburse a Provider furnishing organ or bone marrow
transplant surgeries to a Member the amount the Provider could collect for those
same services if the Member accessed those services in the FFS delivery
system, as defined by DHCS in the California Medicaid State Plan, a Directed
Payment Initiative, and other applicable guidance, including but not limited to
guidance issued pursuant to W&I section 14184.102(d).
3.3.15 Long-Term Care Services
In accordance with W&I sections 14184.201(b) and (c), and for applicable dates
of service, Contractor must reimburse a Network Provider furnishing institutional
Long-Term Care LTC services to a Member the amount the Provider could
collect if the Member accessed those services in the FFS delivery system, as
defined by DHCS in the California Medicaid State Plan, a Directed Payment
Initiative, and other applicable guidance, including but not limited to guidance
issued pursuant to W&I section 14184.102(d). As used in this provision,
“institutional LTC services” has the same meaning as set forth in the California
Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) Terms and Conditions and, subject
to W&I section 141814.201(g), includes, at a minimum, all of the following
services: Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) services; subacute facility services;
pediatric subacute facility services; and Intermediate Care Facility for the
Developmentally Disabled (ICF/DD), ICF/DD-Habilitative (ICF/DD-H), and
ICF/DD-Nursing (ICF/DD-N) services.
3.3.16 Emergency Services and Post-Stabilization Care Services
A. Emergency Services
1) Subject to 42 CFR section 422.113(b), Contractor is responsible for
coverage and payment of Emergency Services and must cover and
pay for Emergency Services regardless of whether the Provider
that furnishes the services has a contract with Contractor.
Contractor must not deny payment for treatment obtained when a
Member had an Emergency Medical Condition, including cases in
[[page 189]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 189 of 642
which the absence of immediate medical attention would not have
had the outcomes specified in 42 CFR section 438.114(a)(i) – (iii).
Further, Contractor must not deny payment for treatment obtained
when a representative of Contractor instructs the Member to seek
Emergency Services. Emergency Services must not be subject to
Prior Authorization by Contractor.
2) Contractor must not limit what constitutes an Emergency Medical
Condition on the basis of lists of diagnoses or symptoms or refuse
to reimburse Emergency Services based on the emergency room
Provider, hospital, or fiscal agent not notifying the Member’s
Primary Care Providers, Contractor, or DHCS of the Member’s
screening and treatment for Emergency Services. A Member who
has an Emergency Medical Condition must not be held liable for
payment of subsequent screening and treatment needed to
diagnose the specific condition or stabilize the Member.
3) Contractor must reimburse Providers for Emergency Services
received by a Member from out-of-Network Providers. Payments to
non-contracting Providers must be for the treatment of the
Emergency Medical Condition, including Medically Necessary
inpatient services rendered to a Member until the Member's
condition has stabilized sufficiently to permit referral and transfer in
accordance with instructions from Contractor or the Member is
stabilized sufficiently to permit discharge. The treating Provider is
responsible for determining when the Member is sufficiently
stabilized for transfer or discharge and that determination is binding
on Contractor. Emergency Services must not be subject to Prior
Authorization by Contractor.
4) At a minimum, Contractor must reimburse the non-contracting
emergency department and, if applicable, its affiliated Providers for
physician services at the lowest level of the emergency department
evaluation and management physician's Current Procedural
Terminology (CPT) codes, unless a higher level is clearly supported
by documentation, and for the facility fee and diagnostic services
such as laboratory and radiology.
5) For all non-contracted Emergency Services Providers,
reimbursement by Contractor or by a Subcontractor or Downstream
Subcontractor who is at risk for out-of-Network Emergency
Services for properly documented claims for services rendered by
out-of-Network Provider pursuant to this provision must be made in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.5 (Claims
Processing) above and 42 USC section 1396u-2(b)(2)(D).
[[page 190]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 190 of 642
B. Post-Stabilization Care Services
1) Except for the response time periods set forth in 42 CFR section
422.113(c)(2)(ii) and (iii)(A), Post-Stabilization Care Services must
be covered by and paid for in accordance with 42 CFR section
422.113(c) and APL 23-009. Applicable response time periods
involving Post-Stabilization Care Services is governed by Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 2.3.2(B) (Timeframes for Medical
Authorization) of this Contract and APL 23-009. Contractor is
financially responsible for Post-Stabilization Care Services obtained
within or outside Contractor’s Network that are authorized by
Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor.
2) In accordance with 28 CCR section 1300.71.4, Contractor must
approve or disapprove a request for Post-Stabilization Care
Services made by a Provider on behalf of a Member within 30
minutes of the request. If Contractor fails to approve or disapprove
authorization within the required timeframe, the authorization is
deemed approved.
3) Contractor is also financially responsible for Post-Stabilization Care
Services obtained within or outside Contractor’s Network that are
not authorized by Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor, but administered to maintain, improve, or resolve
the Member’s stabilized condition if Contractor, Subcontractor, or
Downstream Subcontractor does not respond to a request for
authorization within 30 minutes; Contractor, Subcontractor, or
Downstream Subcontractor cannot be contacted; or Contractor,
Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor and the treating
Provider cannot reach an agreement concerning the Member’s
care. In this situation, the treating Provider may continue with care
of the Member until Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor is reached and assumes responsibility for the
Member’s care or one of the criteria of 42 CFR section
422.113(c)(3) is satisfied.
4) Contractor’s financial responsibility for Post-Stabilization Care
Services it has not authorized ends when a Network Provider with
privileges at the treating hospital assumes responsibility for the
Member's care; a Network Provider assumes responsibility for the
Member's care through transfer; Contractor’s Representative and
the treating Provider reach an agreement concerning the Member’s
care; or the Member is discharged.
5) Consistent with 42 CFR sections 438.114(e), 422.113(c)(2), and
422.214, Contractor is financially responsible for payment of Post-
[[page 191]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 191 of 642
Stabilization Care Services, following an emergency admission, at
the hospital’s Medi-Cal FFS Rate for general acute care inpatient
services rendered by a non-contracting, Medi-Cal certified hospital,
unless a lower rate is agreed to in writing and signed by the
hospital.
a) For the purposes of this Subsection 3.3.16 (Emergency
Services and Post-Stabilization Care Services), the FFS
payment amounts for dates of service when the Post-
Stabilization Care Services were rendered must be the FFS
payment method known as diagnosis-related groups, which
for the purposes of this Paragraph 5 must apply to all acute
care hospitals, including public hospitals that are reimbursed
under the certified public expenditure basis methodology
(W&I section 14166 et seq.), less any associated direct or
indirect medical education payments to the extent
applicable.
b) Payment made by Contractor to a hospital that accurately
reflects the payment amounts required by this Paragraph 5
must constitute payment in full and must not be subject to
subsequent adjustments or reconciliations by Contractor,
except as provided by Medicaid law and regulations. A
hospital’s tentative and final cost settlement processes
required by 22 CCR section 51536 must not have any effect
on payments made by Contractor pursuant to this Paragraph
5.
C. Disputed claims involving Emergency Services and/or Post-Stabilization
Care Services may be submitted for resolution under provisions of W&I
section 14454 and 22 CCR section 53620 et seq. (except section 53698)
to:
Department of Health Care Services
Office of Administrative Hearings and Appeals
3831 North Freeway Blvd, Suite 200
Sacramento, CA 95834
Contractor agrees to implement DHCS’ determination and reimburse the
out-of-Network Provider within 30 calendar days of the effective date of a
decision that Contractor is liable for payment of a claim and must provide
proof of reimbursement in such form as DHCS directs. Failure to
reimburse the out-of-Network Provider within 30 calendar days must result
in capitation offsets in accordance with W&I sections 14454(c) and
14115.5 and 22 CCR section 53702 and may subject Contractor to
sanctions pursuant to W&I section 14197.7.
[[page 192]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 192 of 642
3.3.17 Provider-Preventable Conditions
Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor, or Network Provider
must not pay any Provider claims nor reimburse a Provider for a Provider-
Preventable Condition (PPC) in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.3(g).
Contractor must report and require any and all of its Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors to report PPCs in the form and
frequency required by APL 17-009.
3.3.18 Prohibition Against Payment to Excluded Providers
In accordance with 42 USC section 1396b(i)(2), Contractor must not pay any
amount for any services or items, other than Emergency Services, to an
Excluded Provider as defined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.3.4.A,
(Tracking Suspended, Excluded, and Ineligible Providers) of this Contract. This
prohibition applies to non-emergent services furnished by a Provider at the
medical direction or prescribed by an Excluded Provider when the Provider knew
or had a reason to know of the exclusion or prescribed by an Excluded Provider
to whom DHCS has failed to suspend payment while pending an investigation of
a credible allegation of Fraud.
3.3.19 Compliance with Directed Payment Initiatives and Related Reimbursement
Requirements
Contractor must reimburse eligible Providers in accordance with the terms of
applicable Pass-Through Payments and Directed Payment Incentives as
specified in Exhibit B, Section 1.14 (Special Contract Provisions Related to
Payment). Contractor must provide Provider-level data to DHCS and Providers
eligible for Directed Payment Initiatives in a form and manner specified by DHCS
through APLs or other technical guidance.
[[page 193]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 193 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
4.0 Member
DHCS is committed to ensuring that the Medi-Cal Member’s experience is at the
center of health care delivery from the point of Enrollment into a managed care
plan throughout their time as a Member.
This Article makes explicit DHCS’ commitment to a comprehensive population
health managed approach that ensures all Members have equitable access to
necessary wellness and prevention services, Care Coordination, Complex Care
Management (CCM), Transitional Care Services, and Enhanced Care
Management (ECM). From assessing the needs of Members on a population
basis, to identifying and stratifying Members’ risk on an individual basis,
Contractors are required to have the systems (including data analytic
capabilities), processes, and people (including ECM Providers in network with
direct experience working with specific Populations of Focus) to support
appropriate Population Health Management functions.
This Article also makes explicit DHCS’ commitment to ensure that Members are
appropriately accessing Covered Services, including when they are referred to
community-based Providers. For example, Contractor must ensure referrals to
services provided by Community Health Workers (CHWs), peer counselors, and
local community organizations providing Community Support services.
This Article includes provisions that directly address Social Drivers of Health
(SDOH) – from capturing and tracking SDOH data to providing Community
Support services. Community Support services, such as medically tailored meals
and short-term post-hospitalization services, are intended to address SDOH and
can be provided by Contractors to the extent they are medically appropriate,
cost-effective substitutes for Covered Services.
Finally, this Article outlines provisions related to Grievances and Appeals which
includes processes by which Contractors must inform Members of their rights
and ensure seamless processes by which Members can exercise their rights.
DHCS also includes reporting requirements to enable DHCS to effectively
monitor, oversee, and enforce Contract provisions when needed.
[[page 194]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 194 of 642
4.1 Marketing
4.1.1 Training and Certification of Marketing Representatives
4.1.2 Marketing Plan
[[page 195]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 195 of 642
4.1 Marketing
4.1.1 Training and Certification of Marketing Representatives
Before conducting any Marketing, Contractor must develop a training and
certification program for Contractor’s Marketing Representatives, and ensure that
all staff performing any Marketing activities or distributing Marketing Materials are
appropriately certified.
A. Contractor is responsible for all Marketing activities conducted on its
behalf. Contractor is liable for all violations committed by any of its
Marketing Representatives. Marketing staff must not provide Marketing
services for more than one Contractor, and Marketing strategies must
align with Contractor’s efforts in improving Health Equity. Marketing
Representatives must not engage in Marketing practices that illegally
discriminate against a Member or Potential Member on the basis of any
characteristic protected by federal or State law. Such protected
characteristics include, without limitation, sex, race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, creed, ethnic group identification, age, mental
disability, physical disability, medical condition, genetic information, health
status, marital status, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or
identification with any other persons or groups defined in Penal Code
section 422.56. Contractor must ensure all Marketing activities and
Marketing Materials are culturally and linguistically competent in
compliance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.3 (Member
Information) and Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11 (Cultural and
Linguistic Programs and Committees).
B. Training Program
Contractor must develop a training program that will train staff and prepare
Marketing Representatives for certification. Prior to implementation,
Contractor must obtain written approval from DHCS for Contractor’s
training and certification program, and any changes in the program.
Contractor must develop and provide to Marketing Representatives a staff
orientation and Marketing Representative training/certification manual. At
a minimum, the manual must explain:
1) The Medi-Cal program, including Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service (FFS),
Medi-Cal managed care, Network Providers, Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and program eligibility;
2) The Medi-Cal scope of services;
3) Contractor’s administrative operations and health delivery system
program, including the Service Area covered, Excluded Services,
[[page 196]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 196 of 642
additional services, conditions of Member Enrollment, and aid
categories;
4) Contractor’s Utilization Management policy, including, but not
limited to, how Members are obligated to obtain all Non-Emergency
medical care through Contractor’s Network and a description of all
prerequisites to medical care and other health care services, such
as referrals and Prior Authorizations;
5) Contractor’s Grievance and Appeals procedures; the State Hearing
process; and, as applicable to Contractor’s plan model, the
Independent Medical Review (IMR) process;
6) When Members can disenroll from Contractor, including qualifying
conditions for both voluntary and mandatory disenrollment;
7) Contractor’s obligation to keep confidential any information
obtained from Members and Potential Members, including
information regarding eligibility under any public welfare or social
services program;
8) How Contractor will supervise and monitor its Marketing
Representatives and staff to ensure compliance with applicable
statutes and regulations;
9) The types of acceptable and prohibited communication methods
and sales techniques Marketing Representatives may or may not
use;
10) Contractor’s anti-discrimination policy and the prohibition against
the Enrollment or failure to enroll a Member or Potential Member
due to a pre-existing medical condition (except for conditions
requiring Excluded Services); and
11) The consequences of Marketing misrepresentation and Abuse,
including, but not limited to, discipline, suspension of Marketing
activities, termination, and civil and criminal prosecution. The
Marketing Representative and Contractor must understand that any
Abuse of Marketing requirements can result in termination of this
Contract.
4.1.2 Marketing Plan
Before conducting any Marketing, or implementing any Marketing plan,
Contractor must develop and obtain DHCS written approval for its Marketing plan
or changes to a Marketing plan as specified below. The Marketing plan must be
[[page 197]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 197 of 642
specific to the Medi-Cal program only and Marketing Materials must be
distributed within Contractor’s entire Service Area. Contractor must ensure that
the Marketing plan and all related materials are accurate and do not mislead,
confuse, or defraud Members, Potential Members, or the Medi-Cal program.
A. Contractor must submit a Marketing plan to DHCS for review and approval
on an annual basis and any time Contractor desires to change its
Marketing plan. The Marketing plan, whether new or revised, must
describe all of Contractor’s current and proposed Marketing, including, but
not limited to, all procedures, activities, events, and methods.
B. Contractor’s Marketing plan must contain the following:
1) A table of contents section that divides the Marketing plan into
chapters, sections, or pages. Each page must be dated and
numbered so that chapters, sections, or pages can be easily
identified and replaced when revised.
2) A mission statement or statement of purpose for the Marketing
plan.
3) An organizational chart including key staff positions and the
Marketing director’s name, address, telephone, and facsimile
number.
4) A narrative description explaining how Contractor’s internal
Marketing department operates by identifying key staff positions,
roles, and responsibilities. The narrative must also report
relationships including, if applicable, how Contractor’s commercial
Marketing staff and functions interface with Contractor’s Medi-Cal
Marketing staff and functions.
5) Copies of all Member incentives Contractor will distribute during
any Marketing event or through any other Marketing activities, in
accordance with All Plan Letter (APL) 16-005.
6) An explicit description of all of Contractor’s expected Marketing
methods and activities.
7) Documentation of all agreements between Contractor and the
organizations with which it is undertaking Marketing activities.
8) All Marketing Materials Contractor will use, including those for
English-speaking populations, non-English speaking populations,
and alternative formats for people with disabilities (including Braille,
[[page 198]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 198 of 642
large-size print font no smaller than 20-point, accessible electronic
format, and audio format).
9) A description of the methods Contractor will use to distribute
Marketing Materials in compliance with APLs, this Contract, and
State and federal law, including, but not limited to, the Telephone
Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (47 United States Code (USC)
section 227).
10) Copies of a sample Marketing identification badge and business
card clearly identifying Marketing Representatives as Contractor’s
employees. Marketing identification badges and business cards
must not resemble those of a government agency.
11) Written formal procedures for monitoring the performance of
Contractor’s Marketing Representatives to ensure Marketing
integrity, pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I) section
14408(c).
12) All sites for proposed Marketing activities, such as annual health
fairs and community events in which Contractor proposes to
participate.
13) All other information requested by DHCS to assess Contractor’s
Marketing program.
C. If Contractor wishes to conduct a Marketing activity not included in the
approved Marketing plan, Contractor must submit a written request and
obtain prior written approval for that Marketing activity from DHCS.
Contractor must submit the written request, a copy of the proposed
Marketing Materials, and all other required documentation at least 30
calendar days prior to the Marketing activity, unless DHCS agrees to a
shorter review period.
D. At least 30 calendar days before Contractor’s participation in any
proposed Marketing events, Contractor must notify its designated DHCS
Contract Manager in writing and provide required documentation for
DHCS review and approval. In cases where Contractor learns of a
Marketing event less than 30 calendar days before the event, Contractor
must immediately provide written notification and required documentation
to DHCS for review and approval. In no instance may notification be less
than two Working Days before the Marketing event.
E. At least 30 calendar days before Contractor’s participation in any
proposed Marketing events, Contractor must submit a community event
Marketing agreement for DHCS review and approval. Along with the
[[page 199]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 199 of 642
community event Marketing agreement, there must be an attestation from
the event organization stating that:
1) Contractor will not distribute Marketing Materials or conduct
Marketing presentations at a Network Provider, Subcontractor,
Downstream Subcontractor, or out-of-Network Provider site,
including hospitals and their property; and
2) There are trained Marketing staff at the Marketing event and, if the
Marketing event is educational, there are trained health educators
at the Marketing event.
F. Contractor must obtain prior DHCS approval before performing in-home
Marketing presentations and must provide strict accountability, including
documentation from the Potential Member requesting an in-home
Marketing presentation or a telephone log entry documenting the Potential
Member’s request.
G. Contractor must submit any advertisement intended for Marketing
purposes to DHCS for prior approval. Such advertisements include, but
are not limited to, mass media, magazines, newspapers, radio, telephonic
Marketing, TV, billboards, bus sides, and any mobile advertisements.
H. Contractor must not position any mobile advertisements at any Network
Provider, Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or non-contracted
Provider sites, including hospitals and their property.
I. When conducting Marketing, Contractor must comply with W&I sections
10850(b), 14407.1, 14408, 14409, 14410, and 14411 and 22 California
Code of Regulations (CCR) sections 53880 and 53881.
J. Contractor must not engage in door-to-door, telephone, e-mail, texting, or
other Cold-Call Marketing for the purpose of enrolling Potential Members,
or for any other purpose.
K. Contractor must not distribute Marketing Materials or conduct Marketing
presentations at any Network Provider, Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, or out-of-Network Provider sites, including hospitals and
their property.
L. Contractor must not seek to influence Enrollment in conjunction with the
sale or offering of any private insurance.
M. Contractor’s Marketing Materials must not contain any statements that
suggest Enrollment is necessary to obtain or to avoid losing Medi-Cal
[[page 200]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 200 of 642
benefits, or that Contractor is endorsed by DHCS, Center for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS), or any other State or federal government entity.
N. All of Contractor’s Marketing must be accurate and not mislead, confuse,
or defraud Members, Potential Members, or the Medi-Cal program,
pursuant to 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.104.
[[page 201]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 201 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
4.2 Enrollments and Disenrollments
4.2.1 Enrollment
4.2.2 Disenrollment
[[page 202]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 202 of 642
4.2 Enrollments and Disenrollments
4.2.1 Enrollment
Contractor must cooperate with the DHCS Enrollment processes and the DHCS
Enrollment contractor in enrolling all Potential Members into Medi-Cal managed
care health plans. DHCS and its Enrollment contractor will verify eligibility status
and notify the Potential Member of the available Medi-Cal managed care health
plans in their County. Contractor must ensure mandatory and voluntary Potential
Members residing in its Service Area, are properly enrolled pursuant to the
requirements of this provision.
A. Non-Discrimination in Enrollment
Contractor must accept as Members all Potential Members who select or
are assigned to Contractor without regard to sex, race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, creed, ethnic group identification, age, mental
disability, physical disability, pre-existing medical condition(s), genetic
information, health status, marital status, gender, gender identity, sexual
orientation, existing or prior involvement in the justice system, or
identification with any other persons or groups defined in California Penal
Code section 422.56.
B. Enrollment Processing Criteria
1) Contractor must accept as Members all Potential Members who
meet the Enrollment criteria in 22 California Code of Regulations
(CCR) section 53845, as follows:
a) Potential Members with a Mandatory aid code unless they
qualify for an exemption from Enrollment pursuant to 22
CCR section 53887 or meet the criteria in 22 CCR section
53891(c).
b) Potential Members with a Mandatory aid code who are
default enrolled because they did not select a Medi-Cal
managed care plan during the choice timeframe.
c) Potential Members with a Justice Involved aid code who are
default enrolled per the Justice Involved Reentry Initiative, as
described in the Policy and Operational Guide for Planning
and Implementing CalAIM Justice-Involved Reentry Initiative.
d) Potential Members with a Voluntary aid code who select
Contractor as their Medi-Cal managed care plan.
[[page 203]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 203 of 642
C. Enrollment Process
1) Contractor will receive an effective Enrollment date from DHCS that
is no later than 90 calendar days from the date that Medi-Cal
Eligibility Data System (MEDS) lists the individual as meeting the
required Enrollment criteria contained in 22 CCR section 53845(a).
2) DHCS or its Enrollment contractor will assign Potential Members
meeting the Enrollment criteria contained in 22 CCR section
53845(a) to Medi-Cal Managed Care Health Plans in accordance
with 22 CCR section 53884, if the Potential Member fails to select a
plan after receiving notice that they are required to enroll in Medi-
Cal Managed Care.
3) Notwithstanding any other provision in this Contract, Paragraphs 1)
and 2) above do not apply to Potential Members without a current
valid deliverable address or with an address designated as a
county post office box for homeless Members.
D. Enrollment Disputes
1) Contractor must notify DHCS of Enrollment disputes, pursuant to
the requirements and procedures contained in Exhibit E, Section
1.21 (Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements).
2) DHCS has 120 calendar days from the date of DHCS’ receipt of
Contractor’s Enrollment dispute notice (the “cure period”) to make
necessary Enrollment corrections or adjustments, identified in
Contractor’s dispute notice, without incurring any financial liability to
Contractor. For purposes of this Provision, DHCS will be deemed to
have corrected or adjusted any issues identified in Contractor’s
notice if, within the cure period, any of the following occurs:
a) Mandatory plan Members receive an effective Member
Assignment date that is within the cure period; or
b) DHCS corrects or adjusts an Enrollment issue by redirecting
Enrollment from Contractor to another Contractor within the
cure period; or
c) Within the cure period, DHCS changes the distribution of
Member Assignment, subject to the requirements of 22 CCR
section 53845, to the maximum extent new Members are
available to be assigned, to adjust for the number of
incorrectly assigned Members.
[[page 204]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 204 of 642
3) If it is necessary to redirect Enrollment or change the distribution of
Member Assignment and such change varies from the
requirements of 22 CCR section 53884(b)(5) or (b)(6), Contractor
agrees it will neither seek legal nor equitable relief for such
variance or the results of such variance if DHCS resumes
assignment consistent with 22 CCR sections 53884(b)(5) or (b)(6)
after any necessary Enrollment correction or adjustment.
4) DHCS will not be financially liable to Contractor for any Enrollment
dispute, in an affected county (on a county-by-county basis) if
Contractor’s loss of mandatory plan Members, in a month in which
a dispute occurs, is less than 5 percent of Contractor’s total
Members in that affected county. The parties acknowledge that the
above referenced 5 percent threshold will apply on a county-by-
county basis, not in the aggregate. DHCS’ financial liability must not
exceed 15 percent of Contractor’s monthly Capitation Payment.
E. Coverage
1) Member coverage begins at 12:01 a.m. on the first day of the
calendar month for which the Potential Member’s name is included
on the list of new Members assigned to Contractor. The term of
Enrollment continues indefinitely until this Contract expires, is
terminated, or the Member is disenrolled pursuant to the conditions
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.2.2
(Disenrollment) below.
2) Contractor must authorize and provide coverage for Medically
Necessary Covered Services to a Child born to a Member for the
month of birth and the following month. No additional Capitation
Payment is owed Contractor for the services provided to the
newborn Child for month of birth and the month following birth.
F. Temporary Exemption from Mandatory Enrollment
A Member in a mandatory aid code category who currently has a DHCS
approved medical exemption request pursuant to 22 CCR section 53887
will not be assigned to Contractor until the medical exemption expires or
the medical exemption is subsequently denied by DHCS.
G. Mandatory Assignment Restrictions
Assignment will continue on a monthly basis unless restricted by DHCS.
DHCS will impose assignment restrictions and provide written notice to
Contractor at least ten calendar days prior to the start of the restriction
[[page 205]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 205 of 642
period. DHCS will notify Contractor at least ten calendar days before the
end of the restriction period.
4.2.2 Disenrollment
DHCS or its agent will process a Member’s disenrollment from Contractor under
the following conditions, in accordance with the provisions of 22 CCR section
53891:
A. Disenrollment from Contractor is mandatory when:
1) The Member requests disenrollment with a request for Enrollment
in the competing Medi-Cal managed care plan pursuant to 22 CCR
section 53891(c), subject to any lock in restrictions on disenrollment
under the federal lock in option, if applicable, or when the Member
enrolls in a Medicare Advantage plan that is affiliated with a
competing Medi-Cal managed care plan.
2) The Member is no longer eligible for Enrollment with Contractor
because they lost Medi-Cal eligibility, including the death of a
Member.
3) Contractor’s contract is terminated or Contractor no longer
participates in the Medi-Cal Program.
4) Enrollment was in violation of 22 CCR section 53891(a)(2), or
requirements of this Contract regarding Marketing.
5) The Member requests disenrollment in accordance with Welfare
and Institutions Code (W&I) section 14303.1, following a merger
with other organizations, or W&I section 14303.2, following a
reorganization or merger, with a parent or subsidiary corporation. In
these circumstances, Contractor must give Members the option to
disenroll for any cause, and request Enrollment in another Medi-Cal
managed care plan within 60 calendar days following the date of
the reorganization or merger. Contractor must not disenroll the
Member to Fee-For-Service (FFS).
6) A Member’s change of residence is outside of Contractor's Service
Area.
Mandatory disenrollment from Contractor will be effective on the first day
of the next month after DHCS receives all documentation it determines are
necessary to process the disenrollment, provided disenrollment was
requested at least 30 calendar days prior to that date.
[[page 206]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 206 of 642
B. Except as provided in above Paragraph A.6) of this Subsection,
Enrollment terminates no later than midnight on the last day of the first
calendar month after DHCS receives the Member's disenrollment request
and all required supporting documentation for Enrollment in a competing
plan. On the first day after Enrollment ceases, Contractor is relieved of all
obligations to provide Covered Services to the Member under the terms of
this Contract. Contractor agrees in turn to return to DHCS any Capitation
Payment forwarded to Contractor for Members no longer enrolled with
Contractor under this Contract.
C. Contractor must implement and maintain procedures to ensure that all
Members requesting disenrollment are provided an explanation of the
Member's right to disenroll at any time, with the requirement that the
Member enroll in the competing Medi-Cal managed care plan in the
county, subject to the requirements in 22 CCR section 53891(c), and any
restricted disenrollment period. Additionally, Contractor must immediately
refer Members requesting disenrollment from Contractor to the DHCS
Enrollment contractor so the Member may be enrolled in another Medi-Cal
managed care plan or disenrolled because they require a carved-out
service.
[[page 207]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 207 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
4.3 Population Health Management and Coordination of Care
4.3.1 Population Health Management Program Requirements
4.3.2 Population Needs Assessment
4.3.3 Data Integration and Exchange
4.3.4 Medi-Cal Connect (DHCS’ PHM Service)
4.3.5 Population Risk Stratification and Segmentation, and Risk Tiering
4.3.6 Screening and Assessments
4.3.7 Care Management Programs
4.3.8 Basic Population Health Management
4.3.9 Other Population Health Requirements for Children
4.3.10 Transitional Care Services
4.3.11 Targeted Case Management Services
4.3.12 Mental Health Services
4.3.13 Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Treatment Services
4.3.14 California Children’s Services
4.3.15 Services for Persons with Developmental Disabilities
4.3.16 School-Based Services
4.3.17 Dental
4.3.18 Direct Observed Therapy for Treatment of Tuberculosis
4.3.19 Women, Infants, and Children Supplemental Nutrition Program
4.3.20 Home and Community-Based Services Programs
4.3.21 In-Home Supportive Services
4.3.22 Indian Health Care Providers
4.3.23 Justice Involved Reentry Coordination
4.3.24 Managed Care Liaisons
[[page 208]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 208 of 642
4.3 Population Health Management and Coordination of Care
4.3.1 Population Health Management Program Requirements
A. Contractor must develop and maintain a Population Health Management
(PHM) program that ensures all Members have equitable access to
necessary wellness and prevention services, Care Coordination and care
management. Contractor must assessMember needs across the
continuum of care based on Member preferences, data-driven risk
stratification, identified gaps in care and standardized assessment
processes at both the individual Member level, and at the community
level. Contractor must maintain a PHM program that seeks to improve the
health outcomes of all Members consistent with the requirements set
forth in this Section and DHCS guidance. Contractor must report on PHM
program operations, effectiveness, and outcomes based on DHCS
guidance specified in the PHM Policy Guide, as noted in All Plan Letter
(APL) 22-024.
B. Contractor must ensure its PHM program meets, at a minimum, all
National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) PHM standards as
well as applicable federal and State requirements as set forth in APL 22-
024. As described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.2
(Population Needs Assessment) and in accordance with APL 23-021,
Contractor must fulfill its Population Needs Assessment (PNA)
requirement by meaningfully participating in the local health jurisdiction
(LHJ) Community Health Assessment (CHA)/ Community Health
Implementation Plan (CHIP) process in the Service Area county(ies) in
which it operates, and submit a PHM Strategy, informed by PNA findings,
to DHCS. PHM Strategy submission documentation will include an
NCQA-approved PHM strategy for accredited Plans. Contractor that has
not yet obtained NCQA accreditation is still responsible for submitting
PHM Strategy documentation prepared for near-future NCQA submission
in line with NCQA Health Plan Accreditation standards, inclusive of
population assessment documentation informing PHM Strategy and
accreditation application process if Contractor is without current
accreditation, upon DHCS request.
4.3.2 Population Needs Assessment
A. Contractor must conduct a Population Needs Assessment (PNA) by
participating in the CHA/CHIP processes led by Local Health Departments
(LHDs) in the Service Area county(ies) where Contractor operates, as
defined further in APL 23-021 and the PHM Policy Guide.
B. Contractor operating in multiple LHD jurisdictions must participate in the
CHA/CHIP process for each jurisdiction in which it operates.
[[page 209]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 209 of 642
C. Contractor must submit an annual PHM Strategy that demonstrates that
Contractor is responding to community needs and provides PHM updates
as specified and, in the format prescribed by DHCS.
D. Contractor must ensure that any populations covered by a Fully Delegated
Subcontractor, Partially Delegated Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor are included in the PNA and PHM Strategy process.
E. Contractor must publish on its website all LHD CHAs/CHIPs in the Service
Area along with a brief description of how Contractor participated in the
CHA/CHIP process. Contractor must also share findings from the
CHA/CHIPs in Service Area with their Community Advisory Committees
(CACs).
F. Based on participation in the CHA/CHIP process in the Service Area,
Contractor must annually review and update the following in accordance
with the population-level needs and the DHCS Comprehensive Quality
Strategy:
1) Targeted health education materials for Members, including
Member-facing outreach materials for any identified gaps in
services and resources, including but not limited, to Non-Specialty
Mental Health Services;
2) Cultural and linguistic and quality improvement strategies to
address identified population-level health and social needs; and
3) Wellness and prevention programs.
G. Contractor’s MOU with an LHD must include a requirement that Contractor
coordinate with the LHD to develop a process to implement DHCS
guidance regarding the PNA and PHM Strategy requirements.
H. The PNA and PHM Strategy requirements, as outlined in this Subsection,
and other PHM deliverables, as described in this Contract, remain
consistent with 22 CCR, sections 53876, 53851(b)(2), 53851(e), 53853(d),
and 53910.5(a)(2), 28 CCR, section 1300.67.04; 42 CFR sections
438.206(c)(2), 438.330(b)(4) and 438.242(b)(2); and APL 23-021.
I. Additional operational details on the PNA and PHM Strategy are located in
the PHM Policy Guide. Any future updates will also be communicated to
Contractor via the PHM Policy Guide.
4.3.3 Data Integration and Exchange
[[page 210]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 210 of 642
In accordance with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
Interoperability and Patient Access final rule (CMS-9115-F) and applicable
federal and State data exchange requirements, Contractor must integrate its
PHM data by expanding its Management Information System (MIS) capabilities
outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.1 (Management Information
System), as follows:
A. Integrate additional data sources in accordance with all NCQA PHM
standards to ensure the ability to assess the needs and characteristics of
all Members;
B. Enhance interoperability of its MIS to allow for data exchange with Health
Information Technology (HIT) systems and Health Information Exchange
(HIE) networks as specified by the DHCS;
C. Enhance interoperability of the PHM Service, in support of population
health principles, integrated care, and Care Coordination across delivery
systems;
D. Provide DHCS with administrative, clinical, and other data requirements
as specified by the DHCS; and
E. Comply with all data sharing agreements, including data exchange
policies and procedures, as defined by the California Health and Human
Services Data Exchange Framework in accordance with Health & Safety
Code (H&S) section 130290.
F. Comply with the CMS Interoperability and Patient Access Final Rule set
forth at CMS-9115-F.
4.3.4 Medi-Cal Connect (DHCS’ PHM Service)
Contractor must use the PHM Service in accordance with all applicable federal
and State laws and regulations, and in a manner specified by DHCS. Contractor
must use the PHM Service, at a minimum, to:
A. Perform Risk Stratification and Segmentation (RSS) activities and Risk
Tiering functions as described in this Subsection;
B. Identify and assess Member-level risks and needs through use of the
PHM Service’s Risk Tiering functionality, which places Members into high,
medium-rising, or low Risk Tiers, and use the RSS and Risk Tiering
functionality to identify and assess Member-level risks and needs as
specified in the PHM Policy Guide;
[[page 211]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 211 of 642
C. Inform and enable Member screening and assessment activities, including
pre-populating screening and assessment tools; and
D. Support Member engagement and education activities.
4.3.5 Population Risk Stratification and Segmentation, and Risk Tiering
A. Contractor must use RSS and Risk Tiering to identify and assess
Member-level risks and needs and, as needed, connect Members to
services in a manner specified in the PHM Policy Guide and detailed
below:
1) Consider findings from the PNA and all Members’ behavioral,
developmental, physical, oral health, and Long-Term Services and
Supports (LTSS) needs, as well as health risks, rising-risks, and
health-related social needs due to SDOH;
2) Comply with NCQA PHM standards;
3) Risk stratify and/or segment all Members at least annually and
during each of the following timeframes:
a) Upon each Member’s Enrollment;
b) Annually after each Member’s Enrollment;
c) Upon a Significant Change in the health status or level of
care of the Member; and
d) Upon the occurrence of events or new information that
Contractor determines as potentially changing a Member’s
needs, including but not limited to, referrals for Complex
Care Management (CCM), Enhanced Care Management
(ECM), and Transitional Care Services.
4) Submit its processes to DHCS upon request regarding how it
identifies Significant Changes in Members’ health status or level of
care and how it is monitoring appropriate re-stratification;
5) Incorporate a minimum list of data sources, as specified in the PHM
Policy Guide;
6) Avoid and reduce biases in its RSS approach, such as only using
utilization data, by using evidence-based methods to prevent
further exacerbation of Health Disparities; and
[[page 212]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 212 of 642
7) Continuously reassess the effectiveness of the RSS methodologies
and tools.
B. Once the PHM Service RSS and Risk Tiering functionality is available for
use by Contractor, Contractor must use RSS and PHM Service Risk Tiers
to:
1) Connect all Members, including those with rising risk, to an
appropriate and available Contractor-identified level of service,
including but not limited to, care management programs, Basic
PHM, and Transitional Care Services; and
2) Contractor may supplement the PHM Service outputs with local
data sources and methodologies.
C. Upon request, Contractor must ensure that its RSS and Risk Tiering
approach is submitted to DHCS for review and approval in a form and
method prescribed by DHCS.
4.3.6 Screening and Assessments
A. In accordance with 42 CFR section 438.208, Contractor must conduct an
initial screening or assessment of each Member’s needs within 90 days of
Enrollment and share that information with DHCS, and other managed
care health plans or Providers serving the Member, to prevent duplication
of those activities. Contractor must make at least three attempts to contact
a Member to conduct the initial screening or assessment using available
modalities.
B. Contractor must conduct necessary screening and assessments to gain
timely information on the health and social needs of all Members, in
accordance with applicable State and federal laws and regulations, and
NCQA PHM standards.
C. Contractor must abide by DHCS guidance for Member screening and
assessment, including guidance for how to use the PHM Service for the
screening and assessment process.
D. Contractor must monitor what percentage of required assessments are
completed per the specifications above.
4.3.7 Care Management Programs
Contractor must maintain a PHM delivery infrastructure to ensure that the needs
of its entire Member population are met across the continuum of care. The
infrastructure must provide Members with the appropriate level of care
[[page 213]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 213 of 642
management through person-centered interventions based on the intensity of
health and social needs and services required. The care management
interventions described in this Subsection are intended for specific segments of
the population that require more intensive engagement than the Basic PHM
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.8 (Basic Population Health
Management). Members receiving the care management services described in
this Subsection must have an assigned CCM Care Manager and a Care
Management Plan (CMP).
Enhanced Care Management
Enhanced Care Management (ECM) is a whole-person, interdisciplinary
approach to comprehensive care management that addresses the clinical and
non-clinical needs of high need and/or high-cost Members. ECM provides
systematic coordination of services and comprehensive care management that is
community-based, interdisciplinary, high-touch, and person-centered. This
benefit is intended for the highest risk Medi-Cal managed care health plan
Members who meet the Populations of Focus criteria. ECM is described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.4 (Enhanced Care Management).
Complex Care Management
Complex Care Management (CCM) (which equates to “Complex Case
Management” as defined by NCQA) is an approach to comprehensive care
management that meets differing needs of high and medium rising-risk Members
through both ongoing, chronic Care Coordination and interventions for episodic,
temporary needs. The overall goal of CCM is to help Members regain optimum
health or improved functional capability, in the right setting, and in a cost-
effective manner. Contractor must consider CCM to be an opt-out program, i.e.
Members have the right to participate or to decline to participate.
Both ECM and CCM are inclusive of Basic PHM, which Contractor must provide
to all Members, at minimum. Care Managers conducting ECM or CCM must
integrate all elements of Basic PHM into their ECM or CCM approach.
A. Care Management Programs
Contractor must operate and administer the following care management
programs:
1) ECM as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.4
(Enhanced Care Management).
2) CCM
[[page 214]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 214 of 642
a) Contractor must operate and administer CCM in accordance
with all NCQA CCM standards and requirements, and
coordinate services for high and medium/rising-risk
Members through Contractor’s CCM approach. To the extent
NCQA’s standards are updated, Contractor must comply
with most recent standards. Contractor must maintain and
provide DHCS with policies and procedures that, at a
minimum, include the following details regarding its CCM
program:
i. Contractor’s CCM program must be designed and
implemented to help Members gain or regain optimum
health or improved functional capability in the right
setting;
ii. Contractor’s CCM program must include
comprehensive assessment of the Member’s
condition; determination of available benefits and
resources; and development and implementation of a
CMP with performance goals, monitoring and follow-
up;
iii. Contractor’s CCM program must have an opt-out
method under which Members meeting criteria for
CCM have the right to decline to participate;
iv. Contractor’s CCM program must include a variety of
interventions for Members that meet the differing
needs of high and medium/rising-risk populations,
including longer-term chronic Care Coordination and
interventions for episodic, temporary needs;
v. Contractor’s CCM program must incorporate disease-
specific management programs (including, but not
limited to, asthma and diabetes) that include self-
management support and health education;
vi. For Members under age 21, Contractor’s CCM
program must include Early Periodic Screening,
Diagnosis and Testing (EPSDT); all Medically
Necessary services, including those that are not
necessarily covered for adult Members, must be
provided as long as they could be Medi-Cal-services.
[[page 215]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 215 of 642
b) Contractor must assess Members for the need for
Community Supports as part of its CCM program to eligible
Members.
c) A description of the CCM program must be included, in a
manner to be prescribed by DHCS, in Contractor’s annual
PHMS for DHCS review and approval, outlining all the
components of its CCM program, including all those listed in
this Subsection.
B. CCM Care Manager Role
1) Assignment of CCM Care Manager
a) Contractor must identify and assign a CCM Care Manager
for every Member receiving CCM. Following NCQA
requirements, Contractor may delegate CCM to Network
Providers or other entities that are NCQA-certified. PCPs
may be assigned as CCM Care Managers when they are
able to meet all the requirements specified in this
Subsection.
b) When a CCM Care Manager other than the Member’s PCP
is assigned, Contractor must provide the Member’s PCP with
the identity of the Member’s assigned CCM Care Manager,
and a copy of the Member’s CMP.
c) When multiple Providers perform separate aspects of Care
Coordination for a Member, Contractor must:
i. Identify a lead CCM Care Manager and communicate
the identity of the Care Manager to all treating
Providers and the Member; and
ii. Maintain policies and procedures to ensure
compliance and non-duplication of Medically
Necessary services and delegation of responsibilities
between Contractor and the Member’s Providers in
meeting all care management requirements.
2) CCM Care Manager Responsibilities
a) Contractor is responsible for ensuring CCM Care Managers
comply with all of the Basic PHM requirements in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.8 (Basic Population Health
Management) and all NCQA CCM standards.
[[page 216]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 216 of 642
b) Contractor must ensure that the CCM Care Manager
performs the following duties:
i. Conduct Member assessments as needed to identify
and close any gaps in care and address the
Member’s physical, mental health, Substance Use
Disorder (SUD), developmental, oral health,
dementia, palliative care, chronic disease, and LTSS
needs as well as needs due to SDOH;
ii. Complete a CMP for all Members receiving CCM,
consistent with the Member’s goals in consultation
with the Member. The CMP must:
a. Address a Member’s health and social needs,
including needs due to SDOH;
b. Be reviewed and updated at least annually,
upon a change in Member’s condition or level
of care, or upon request of the Member;
c. Be in an electronic format and a part of the
Member’s Medical Record, and document all of
the Member’s services and treating Providers;
d. Be developed using a person-centered
planning process that includes identifying,
educating, and training the Member’s parents,
family members, legal guardians, Authorized
Representatives (ARs), caregivers, or
authorized support persons, as needed; and
e. Include referrals to community-based social
services and other resources even if they are
not Covered Services under this Contract.
iii. Ensure continuous information sharing and
communication with the Member and their treating
Providers; and
iv. Specify the responsibility of each Provider that
provides services to the Member.
c) Ensure Members receive all Medically Necessary services,
including Community Supports, to close any gaps in care
[[page 217]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 217 of 642
and address the Member’s mental health, SUD,
developmental, physical, oral health, dementia, palliative
care needs as well as needs due to SDOH;
d) Support and assist the Member in accessing all needed
services and resources, including across the physical and
Behavioral Health delivery systems;
e) Communicate to Members’ parents, family members, legal
guardians, ARs, caregivers, or authorized support persons
all Care Coordination provided to Members, as appropriate;
f) Provide referrals to Community Health Workers (CHWs),
peer counselors, and other community-based social services
including, but not limited to, personal care services, LTSS,
Community Supports and local community organizations and
other programs or services offered by other agencies and
third-party entities with which Contractor has or will have a
MOU;
g) Assess the Member’s understanding of the referral
instructions and follow-up to determine whether the referral
instructions were completed or whether the Member needs
further assistance to access the services, and if so, provide
such assistance;
h) Review and/or modification of Member’s CMP, when
applicable, to address unmet service needs;
i) Facilitate and encourage the Member’s adherence to
recommended interventions and treatment; and
j) Ensure timely authorization of services to meet the
Member’s needs in accordance with the Member’s CMP.
4.3.8 Basic Population Health Management
A. Contractor must provide Basic PHM to all Members, in accordance with 42
CFR section 438.208. Contractor must maintain policies and procedures
that meet the following Basic PHM requirements, at a minimum:
1) Ensure that each Member has an ongoing source of care that is
appropriate, ongoing and timely to meet the Member’s needs;
2) Ensure Members have access to needed services including Care
Coordination, navigation and referrals to services that address
[[page 218]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 218 of 642
Members’ developmental, physical, mental health, SUD, dementia,
LTSS, palliative care, and oral health needs;
3) Ensure that each Member is engaged with their assigned PCP and
that the Member’s assigned PCP plays a key role in the Care
Coordination functions described in this Subsection, in partnership
with Contractor;
4) Ensure each Member receives all needed preventive services in
partnership with the Member’s assigned PCP;
5) Ensure efficient Care Coordination and continuity of care for
Members who may need or are receiving services and/or programs
from out-of-Network Providers;
6) Ensure Members are provided with resources and education about
how to access the various programs and services offered by
agencies and third-party entities with whom Contractor has or will
have an executed MOU;
7) Review Member utilization reports to identify Members not using
Primary Care; stratify such reports, at minimum, by race and
ethnicity to identify Health Disparities that result from differences in
utilization of outpatient and preventive services; and develop
strategies to address differences in utilization;
8) Facilitate access to care for Members by, at a minimum, helping to
make appointments, arranging transportation, ensuring Member
health education on the importance of Primary Care for Members
who have not had any contact with their assigned Medical
Home/PCP or have not been seen within the last 12 months,
particularly Members less than 21 years of age;
9) Ensure all services are delivered in a culturally and linguistically
competent manner that promotes Health Equity for all Members;
10) Coordinate health and social services between settings of care,
across other Medi-Cal managed care health plans, delivery
systems, and programs (e.g., Targeted Case Management,
Specialty Mental Health Services), with external entities outside of
Contractor’s Network, and with Community Supports and other
community-based resources, even if they are not Covered Services
under this Contract, to address Members’ needs and to mitigate
impacts of SDOH;
[[page 219]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 219 of 642
11) Coordinate referrals to ensure Care Coordination with public
benefits programs, including without limitation, as required by this
Contract under the requirements set forth for Memorandums of
Understanding (MOUs) in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6
(MOUs with Local Government Agencies, County Programs, and
Third Parties);
12) Assist Members, Members’ parents, family members, legal
guardians, ARs, caregivers, or authorized support persons with
navigating health delivery systems, including Contractor’s
Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Networks, to access
Covered Services as well as services not covered under this
Contract;
13) Provide Members with resources to address the progression of
disease or disability, and improve behavioral, developmental,
physical, and oral health outcomes;
14) Communicate to Members’ parents, family members, legal
guardians, ARs, caregivers, or authorized support persons all Care
Coordination provided to Members, as appropriate;
15) Ensure that Providers furnishing services to Members maintain and
share, as appropriate, Members’ Medical Records in accordance
with professional standards and State and federal law;
16) Facilitate exchange of necessary Member Information in
accordance with any and all State and federal privacy laws and
regulations, including data exchange policies and procedures, as
defined by the California Health and Human Services Data
Exchange Framework in accordance with H&S section 130290,
specifically pursuant to 45 CFR parts 160 and 164 subparts A and
E, to the extent applicable; and
17) Maintain processes to ensure no duplication of services occurs.
B. Wellness and Prevention Programs
1) Contractor must provide wellness and prevention programs that
meet NCQA PHM standards, including for the provision of
evidence-based self-management tools;
2) Contractor must ensure that the wellness and prevention programs
align with the DHCS Comprehensive Quality Strategy;
[[page 220]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 220 of 642
3) Contractor must provide wellness and prevention programs in a
manner specified by DHCS, and in collaboration with LGAs as
appropriate, that include the following, at a minimum:
a) Identification of specific, proactive wellness initiatives and
programs that address Member needs;
b) Evidence-based disease management programs including,
but not limited to, programs for diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, asthma, and depression that incorporate health
education interventions, target Members for engagement,
and seek to close care gaps for Members participating in
these programs;
c) Initiatives, programs, and evidence-based approaches to
improving access to preventative health visits,
developmental screenings and services for Members less
than 21 years of age, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 5.3.4 (Services for Members Less Than 21
Years of Age);
d) Initiatives, programs, and evidence-based approaches on
improving pregnancy outcomes for women, including
through 12 months post-partum;
e) Initiatives, programs, and evidence-based approaches on
ensuring adults have access to Preventive Care, as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.5
(Services for Adults) and in compliance with all applicable
State and federal laws;
f) A process for monitoring the provision of wellness and
preventive services by PCPs as part of Contractor’s Site
Review process, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.14 (Site Review);
g) Health education materials, in a manner that meets
Members’ health education and cultural and linguistic needs,
in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
5.3.7 (Services for All Members); and
h) Initiatives and programs that implement evidence-based best
practices that are aimed at helping Members set and
achieve wellness goals.
[[page 221]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 221 of 642
4) Contractor must ensure that its wellness and prevention programs
are submitted to DHCS for review and approval in a form and
method prescribed by DHCS.
5) Contract must report annually through the PHMS on how
community-specific information and stakeholder input from the PNA
is used to design and implement evidence-based wellness and
prevention strategies.
4.3.9 Other Population Health Requirements for Children
For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must provide as part of care
management and Basic PHM the following services for Children:
A. Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT) Case
Management Responsibilities
Contractor must provide case management to assist Members less than
21 years of age in gaining access to all Medical Necessary medical,
Behavioral Health, dental, social, educational, and other services, as
defined in 42 United States Code (USC) sections 1396d(a), 1396d(r), and
1396n(g)(2), and Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I) section 14059.5(b).
Case management services for Members less than 21 years of age also
include the data exchange necessary for the provision of services as well
as the coordination of non-covered services such as social support
services. Additionally, Contractor must provide EPSDT case management
services as Medically Necessary services for Members less than 21 years
of age, as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.4 (Services
for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age), and must ensure that all
Medically Necessary services for Members less than 21 years of age are
initiated within timely access standards whether or not the services are
Covered Services under this Contract.
B. Children and Youth with Special Health Care Needs
Contractor must develop and implement policies and procedures to
provide services for CYSHCN. Contractor must ensure that the policies
and procedures include the following information, at a minimum, to
encourage CYSHCN Member participation:
1) Methods for ensuring and monitoring timely access to pediatric
Specialists, sub-Specialists, ancillary therapists, transportation, and
Durable Medical Equipment (DME) and supplies. These may
include assignment to a Specialist as PCP, Standing Referrals, or
other methods.
[[page 222]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 222 of 642
2) Methods for monitoring and improving the quality, Health Equity
and appropriateness of care for CYSHCN.
3) Methods for ensuring Care Coordination with Department of
Developmental Services (DDS), local health departments and local
California Children’s Services (CCS) Programs, as appropriate and
as required under any applicable MOUs between Contractor and
local health departments and DDS for the CCS Program.
C. Early Intervention Services
Contractor must develop and implement systems to identify Members who
may be eligible to receive services from the Early Start program and refer
them to the local Early Start program. These Members include those with
a condition known to lead to developmental delay, those in whom a
developmental delay is suspected, or whose early health history places
them at risk for delay. Contractor must collaborate with the local RC or
local Early Start program in determining the Medically Necessary
diagnostic and preventive services and treatment plans for Members.
Contractor must provide case management and Care Coordination to the
Member to ensure the provision of all Medically Necessary Covered
Services identified in the Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP)
developed by the Early Start program, with PCP participation.
4.3.10 Transitional Care Services
Contractor must provide Transitional Care Services (TCS) to all Members
transferring from one setting, or level of care, to another in accordance with 42
CFR section 438.208, other applicable federal and State laws and regulations,
APL 22-024, and the PHM Policy Guide. Transferring from one setting, or level of
care, to another includes, but is not limited to, discharges from hospitals,
institutions, acute care facilities, and Skilled Nursing Facilities (SNFs) to home or
community-based settings, Community Supports, post-acute care facilities, or
Long-Term Care (LTC) settings.
Contractor must identify every Member undergoing a transition as high-risk or
lower-risk according to the criteria in the PHM Policy Guide.
For all identified high-risk Members, Contractor must ensure a Member has a
single point of contact for the duration of the transition. If a Member identified as
high risk is not receiving CCM or ECM, Contractor must identify a care manager
who is a single point of contact responsible for ensuring the completion of all
Transitional Care Services, including making referrals and ensuring no gaps in
care. For Members identified as lower risk, a single point of contact is not
required, but there must be a dedicated care management team available, as
described further in the PHM Policy Guide.
[[page 223]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 223 of 642
Contractor must ensure that TCS processes meet the requirements of A-C
below, for both high and lower risk Members. The PHM Policy Guide describes in
further detail how the requirements below apply to high and lower risk Members.
Additional guidance is forthcoming on the specific TCS requirements for different
populations.
A. General Requirements for Transitional Care Applicable to All Members in
Transition, including High- and Lower-Risk Members
Contractor must implement transitional care processes that meet the
following further requirements as specified in the PHM Policy Guide, at
minimum:
1) Ensure each Member is evaluated for all care settings appropriate
to the Member’s condition, needs, preferences and circumstances.
Members must not be discharged to a setting that does not meet
their medical and/or LTSS needs;
2) Ensure that permission is obtained from Members, Members’
parents, legal guardians, or ARs, as appropriate to share
information with Providers to facilitate transitions, in accordance
with federal and State privacy laws and regulations;
3) Ensure referrals to Community Supports and coordination with
county social service agencies and waiver agencies for In-Home
Supportive Services (IHSS) and other Home and Community-
Based Services (HCBS) for Members who may be eligible for such
services, and in accordance with any MOU executed between
Contractor and such agencies;
4) Ensure referrals to ECM and Community Supports for Members
identified as having unstable housing, experiencing homelessness,
or needing nursing facility care, for whom transition to
home/assisted living facility or short term post
hospitalization/recuperative care are alternatives;
5) Ensure all Prior Authorizations required for the Member’s discharge
are processed within timeframes consistent with the urgency of the
Member's condition, not to exceed five Working Days for routine
authorizations, or 72 hours for expedited authorizations, in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.3.2
(Timeframes for Medical Authorization). Prior Authorizations should
be complete prior to discharge. This includes Prior Authorizations
for therapy, home care, medical supplies, prescription medications
[[page 224]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 224 of 642
for which Contractor is responsible, and DME that are processed in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.210, H&S section 1367.01,
and Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.3 (Utilization Management
Program) of this Contract;
6) Ensure all Network Provider hospitals, institutions, and facilities
educate their Discharge Planning staff on the services, supplies,
medications, and DME needing Prior Authorization;
7) Ensure that mutually agreed-upon policies and procedures for
Discharge Planning and Transitional Care Services exist between
Contractor and each of its Network Provider and out-of-Network
Provider hospitals within its Service Area;
8) Prevent delayed discharges of a Member from a hospital,
institution, or facility due to circumstances such as, but not limited
to, Contractor authorization procedures or transitions to a lower
level of care, by determining and addressing the root causes of why
delays occur;
9) Require all of its contracted hospitals, and all SNFs with electronic
health records, to send Admission, Discharge, and Transfer (ADT)
notifications to Contractor for each of its assigned Members in
accordance with Interoperability and Patient Access Final Rule set
forth at CMS-9115-F, and in accordance with the California Health
and Human Services Data Exchange Framework set forth in H&S
section 130290, and as further specified in the PHM Policy Guide;
and
10) Ensure all Members being discharged from discharging facilities,
including SNFs, have a PCP who can provide follow-up care, as
appropriate, and that the discharging facilities have contact
information for PCPs.
B. Responsibility to Ensure Completion of Facility’s Discharge Planning
Process, Including Member Engagement for All Members, Including Both
High and Lower Risk Members.
Contractor must ensure the discharging facility completes a Discharge
Planning process that engages Members, Members’ parents, legal
guardians, or Authorized Representatives, as appropriate, when being
discharged from a hospital, institution or facility. Contractor must ensure
that the facility’s process is consistent with CMS Conditions of
Participation, State regulations, and Joint Commission Requirements, as
applicable, including as follows:
[[page 225]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 225 of 642
1) Contractor must ensure the discharging facility focuses on the
Member’s goals and treatment preferences during the discharge
process, and that they are documented in the Medical Record.
Contractor must ensure the discharging facility uses a consistent
assessment process and/or assessment tools to identify Members
who are likely to suffer adverse health consequences upon
discharge in the absence of adequate discharge planning.
a) For high-risk Members, Contractor must ensure the facility
shares this information with the care manager. Contractor
must also ensure the discharging facility has processes and
procedures in place to refer Members to ECM or Community
Supports as needed.
b) For lower risk Members, Contractor must ensure the hospital
has processes and procedures to leverage this assessment
to identify Members who may benefit from services and refer
Members to Contractor for high risk TCS, ECM, or
Community Supports.
2) For discharge instructions, Contractor must ensure that the
Member and their designated caregiver are informed of the
continuing health care requirements following discharge from the
facility. This information must include, but is not limited to,
education and counseling about the Member’s medications,
including dosing and proper use of medication delivery devices,
when applicable. The information must be provided in a culturally
and linguistically appropriate format to the Member and caregiver,
and must include the opportunity for the caregiver to ask questions
about the post-hospital needs of the Member per H & S section
1262.5.
3) For discharge coordination, Contractor must ensure discharging
facility has process in place for coordinating care with the following:
a) For Member’s designated family caregiver, Contractor must
ensure the discharging facility has processes to ensure
Member’s designated family caregiver is notified of the
Member’s discharge or transfer to another facility per H&S
section 1262.5.
b) For post-discharge Providers, Contractor must ensure
discharging facility provides necessary clinical information to
the appropriate post-discharge Providers, including the
discharge summary per 42 CFR section 482.43.
[[page 226]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 226 of 642
C. Transitional Care Services for High and Lower Risk Members
1) Contractor must identify every Member undergoing a transition as
high risk or lower-risk. For the criteria for high and lower-risk, and
detailed requirements for each, refer to the PHM Policy Guide.
2) For Members identified as high risk, Contractor must ensure the
Member has a single point of contact for the duration of the
transition who is responsible for ensuring a successful transition. If
the Member is receiving CCM or ECM, Contractor must ensure that
the Member’s assigned care manager provides all TCS. The single
point of contact is responsible for:
a) Outreach to Member;
b) Assessing Member’s risk for adverse outcomes to inform
needed TCS and identify Members that may require ECM,
CCM (if not already enrolled), or Community Supports, using
the discharging facility data and Member engagement;
c) Reviewing facility discharge summary;
d) Ensuring Member receives appropriate discharge
instructions;
e) Ensuring follow up Providers receive appropriate clinical
information;
f) Ensuring medication reconciliation is complete post
discharge;
g) Ensuring Members with SUD and mental health needs
receive treatment for those conditions upon discharge;
h) Ensuring the completion of all recommended follow-up,
including any needed specialty or primary care follow-up,
any SUD or mental health treatment, or any needed
community or home-based services.
3) For Members identified as lower risk, Contractor must, in addition to
meeting all general requirements in Paragraphs A and B above:
a) Ensure Member has, at minimum, telephonic access to a
dedicated TCS team for at least 30 days from the discharge.
The team must:
[[page 227]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 227 of 642
i. Be able to access the Member’s discharge
documents to be able to assist Member with
questions, including but not limited to medication
changes;
ii. Assist Member with any TCS needs identified by
Member, including but not limited to access to
ambulatory care, appointment scheduling, referrals,
arranging Non-Emergency Medical Transport
(NEMT);
iii. Provide escalation to meet any TCS needs as
needed, including connecting Members with a
licensed Provider, if necessary; and
iv. Place and coordinate referrals to longer term care
management programs such as ECM/CCM, and/or
Community Supports for eligible Members at any
point in the transition.
b) Ensure Member can access the TCS team through a
dedicated phone number as follows:
i. During business hours, Contractor must ensure
Members can connect with live TCS team member
within no more than one automated phone selection
option.
ii. Outside of business hours, Members must be able to
be referred to Emergency Services as needed and be
able to leave a message. TCS team must respond to
Members within one Working Day of message.
iii. Contractor must ensure the Member is notified of the
TCS support team and phone line directly, and make
best efforts to ensure Member is notified directly within
24 hours of discharge.
c) Ensure Member completes follow-up with ambulatory PCP,
Specialist, or advanced practice Provider that has
prescribing authority within 30 calendar days to ensure
medication reconciliation. For a Member who has not had a
visit with their assigned PCP within the last 12 months,
ensure the Member completes PCP follow-up in addition to
any necessary non-primary care ambulatory visits within 30
calendar days.
[[page 228]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 228 of 642
d) Use data from discharges to assess and identify Members
that may newly qualify for ECM/CCM or Community
Supports.
D. Nursing Facility Transitions
1) For diversion from the need for a nursing facility with supports,
Contractor must evaluate all Members who have been identified as
requiring nursing facility care for Community Supports. This
includes the following, as appropriate: short term post-
hospitalization, recuperative care, and respite services; day
habilitation services; Community Supports supporting transitions to
home, or a Residential Care Facility for the Elderly/ Adult
Residential Facility, and personal care/homemaker services; as
well as for ECM, IHSS, and/or waiver programs that may allow the
Member to live at home or in alternative settings with support, as
aligned with the Member’s goals.
2) When transitioning Members to and from SNFs, Contractor must
comply with APL 23-004. Contractor must ensure timely Member
transitions that do not delay or interrupt any Medically Necessary
services or care by meeting the following requirements, at a
minimum:
a) Coordinate with facility discharge planners, care or Case
Managers, or social workers to provide case management
and Transitional Care Services during all transitions;
b) Assist Members being discharged or Members’ parents,
legal guardians, or ARs by evaluating all medical needs and
care settings available including, but not limited to, discharge
to a home or community setting, and referrals and
coordination with IHSS, Community Supports, LTSS, and
other HCBS programs;
c) Maintain contractual requirements for SNFs to share
Minimum Data Set (MDS) Section Q, have appropriate
systems to import and store MDS Section Q data and
incorporate MDS Section Q data into transition
assessments;
d) Ensure all Members being discharged from nursing facilities,
have a PCP that can provide follow-up care, as appropriate,
and that the discharging facilities have contact information
for PCPs;
[[page 229]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 229 of 642
e) Ensure Member outpatient appointment(s) or other
immediate follow-ups are scheduled prior to discharge;
f) Verify with facilities or at-home settings that Members arrive
safely at the agreed upon care setting and have their
medical needs met; and
g) Follow-up with Members, Members’ parents, legal
guardians, or ARs, as appropriate, regarding the new care
setting to ensure compliance with Transitional Care Services
requirements.
4.3.11 Targeted Case Management Services
A. Contractor must identify the target populations for Targeted Case
Management (TCM) programs within their Service Area, and maintain
procedures to refer Members to TCM services. If upon notification from
DHCS that Members are receiving TCM services Contractor is not already
aware of, Contractor must reach out to LGAs to coordinate care, as
appropriate.
B. Contractor must coordinate with LGAs to provide Care Coordination for all
Medically Necessary Covered Services identified by TCM Providers in
their Member care plans, including referrals and Prior Authorization for
out-of-Network medical services. Coordination with LGAs must continue
for Members receiving TCM services until the LGA notifies Contractor that
TCM services are no longer needed for the Member.
C. Because TCM can be a direct duplication of services such as, but not
limited to, Basic PHM, CCM, ECM, and Community Supports, Contractor
must have processes to ensure Members receiving TCM are not receiving
duplicative services. For specific guidance on ECM overlap with county-
based TCM, see the ECM Policy Guide.
D. Contractor must designate a representative responsible for coordinating
TCM services with LGAs for the Member. Contractor representative’s
responsibilities include, but are not limited to, sharing the appropriate
Member Provider(s) information and PCP and/or Care Manager
assignment with LGAs and resolving all related operational issues.
E. Contractor must also notify Members’ PCPs and/or Care Managers when
Members are receiving TCM services and provide them with the
appropriate LGA contact information.
[[page 230]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 230 of 642
F. For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must ensure that all
Medically Necessary services are provided timely as required in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.4 (Services for Members Less Than 21
Years of Age). Notwithstanding medical services recommended in TCM
care plans or arranged by LGAs or TCM Providers for Members less than
21 years of age, Contractor remains responsible for the provision of the
EPSDT benefit, as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.3
(Scope of Services).
4.3.12 Mental Health Services
Contractor must use DHCS-approved standardized screening tools as identified
in APL 22-028 to ensure Members seeking mental health services who are not
currently receiving Non-specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS) or Specialty
Mental Health Services (SMHS) receive referrals to the appropriate delivery
system for mental health services, either in Contractor’s Network or the MHP
network, in accordance with the No Wrong Door policies set forth in W&I section
14184.402(f) and specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.5 (Mental
Health and Substance Use Disorder Benefits).
A. Non-specialty Mental Health Services
Contractor must provide timely NSMHS for Members consistent with the
No Wrong Door policies even when:
1) NSMHS were provided:
a) During the assessment process;
b) Prior to determination of a diagnosis; or
c) Prior to determination of whether NSMHS criteria set forth in
W&I section 14184.402(b)(2) are met;
2) NSMHS were not included in a Member’s individual treatment plan;
3) Member has a co-occurring mental health condition and SUD; or
4) NSMHS are provided to a Member concurrently with SMHS, if
those services are not duplicative and coordinated between
Contractor and the MHP.
B. Specialty Mental Health Services
[[page 231]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 231 of 642
1) Contractor must maintain policies and procedures to refer Members
who meet the criteria for SMHS to the MHP in accordance with the
No Wrong Door policies.
2) Contractor must also enter into a MOU with the MHP in accordance
with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.6.1 (MOU Purpose) to
ensure services for its Members are properly coordinated and
provided in a timely and non-duplicative manner.
3) If a Member receiving NSMHS is determined to meet the criteria for
SMHS due to a change in the Member’s condition, Contractor must
use DHCS-approved standardized transition tools in accordance
with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.5.2 (Non-specialty
Mental Health Services and Substance Use Disorder Services),
and continue to provide NSMHS to the Member concurrently
receiving SMHS when those services are not duplicative and
coordinated between Contractor and the MHP.
C. Mental Health Services Disputes
1) Disputes between Contractor and MHP must not delay the
provision of Medically Necessary services by Contractor or MHP.
2) If Contractor and MHP cannot agree on the appropriate place of
care, disputes must be resolved pursuant to APL 21-013, and as
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.5.5 (Mental
Health and Substance Use Disorder Services Disputes).
Specifically, as set forth in APL 21-013, Contractor and MHPs must
complete the plan level dispute resolution process within 15
Working Days of identifying the dispute.
3) Contractor and MHP may seek to enter into an expedited dispute
resolution process if a Member has not received a disputed
service(s) and Contractor and/or MHP determine that the routine
dispute resolution process timeframe would result in serious
jeopardy to the Member’s life, health, or ability to attain, maintain,
or regain maximum function. Under this expedited process,
Contractor and MHP will have one Working Day after identification
of a dispute to attempt to resolve the dispute at the plan level. All
terms and requirements established in APL 21-013 apply to
disputes between Contractor and MHP.
4.3.13 Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Treatment Services
A. Contractor must identify and refer Members requiring alcohol and/or SUD
treatment services to the County Department responsible for alcohol and
[[page 232]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 232 of 642
SUD treatment, other community resources when services are not
available through the County Department, or to outpatient heroin and
other opioid detoxification Providers available through the Medi-Cal Fee-
For-Service (FFS), as appropriate. Contractor must assist Members in
locating available treatment service sites. To the extent that alcohol and/or
SUD treatment services are not available within Contractor's Service Area,
Contractor must coordinate with the County Department responsible for
SUD treatment to refer Members to available treatment outside of
Contractor’s Service Area.
B. Contractor must have MOUs with each County Department responsible for
alcohol and SUD treatment services within Contractor’s Service Area in
accordance with the MOU requirements in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local Government Agencies, County Programs,
and Third Parties). The MOU must delineate the roles and responsibilities
between Contractor and County Departments for coordinating care, and
ensuring non-duplication of services and timeliness of care for the
Members.
C. For Members receiving alcohol and SUD treatment services through
County Departments, Contractor must continue to provide all Medically
Necessary Covered Services and coordination and referral of services
between its Network Providers and other treatment programs for the
Member.
D. Prescribing and medication management of buprenorphine and other
prescribed medications for SUD treatment (also known as medication-
assisted treatment or MAT) are the responsibility of Contractor when they
are provided in Primary Care offices, departments, hospitals, or other
contracted medical facilities.
E. Contractor must enter into a data sharing agreement with the County
Department responsible for alcohol and SUD treatment, other community
resources when services are not available through the County
Department, or to outpatient opioid disorder treatment. Contractor’s data
sharing agreement with such County Departments must also require such
County Departments, and all Part 2 programs contracting with such
County Departments that provide services to Members, to use
authorization forms that align with DHCS data sharing and authorization
guidance for the disclosure of information that
provide the following:
1) Comply with 42 CFR part 2;
2) Name both Contractor and DHCS as potential recipients of the data
being disclosed;
[[page 233]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 233 of 642
3) Indicate that Contractor and DHCS are permitted to use such data
for payment and health care operations purposes, as defined by
HIPAA; and
4) If 42 CFR Part 2 is modified to permit such a practice, include a
statement indicating that any information disclosed to a covered
entity or business associate may be redisclosed to the extent
permitted by the HIPAA privacy rule, except for uses and
disclosures for civil, criminal, administrative, and legislative
proceedings against the patient.
4.3.14 California Children’s Services
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions in W&I section 14094.4 et seq. for
Contractors operating in COHS counties, Contractor must maintain
policies and procedures to identify and refer Members with a potential
California Children’s Services (CCS)-Eligible Conditions to the local CCS
Program for determination of CCS eligibility. These policies and
procedures must include the following, at a minimum:
1) The requirement that Network Providers complete the appropriate
baseline health assessments and diagnostic evaluations, which
provide sufficient clinical detail to establish, or raise a reasonable
suspicion, that a Member has a potential CCS-Eligible Condition;
2) The requirement that Contractor supports CCS program referral
pathways in the non-Whole Child Model counties including but not
limited to identifying children who may be eligible for the CCS
program through internal reports, Provider directed referrals, or
direct referrals from Contractor;
3) Instruct Network Providers that CCS reimburses only CCS-paneled
Providers and CCS-approved hospitals within Contractor's Network,
and that reimbursement is only from the date of referral;
4) The requirement that Network Providers complete the initial
referrals of Members with suspected CCS-Eligible Conditions same
day using modalities accepted by the local CCS Program. The
initial referral must be followed by submission of supporting medical
documentation sufficient to allow for CCS eligibility determination
by the local CCS Program;
5) Instruct Network Providers of their requirement to continue to
provide all Covered Services to the Member until CCS Program
eligibility is confirmed;
[[page 234]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 234 of 642
6) The requirement that once eligibility for the CCS Program is
established for a Member, Contractor must continue to provide all
Covered Services that are not authorized by CCS Program and
must ensure the coordination of services and joint case
management between the Member’s PCP, CCS Providers, and the
local CCS Program. Contractor must continue to provide case
management services to ensure all Covered Services authorized
through the CCS Program are provided timely as required in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.4 (Services for Members Less
Than 21 Years of Age). Without limitation, Contractor must, as
necessary, including upon a Member's request, arrange for all in-
home nursing hours authorized by the CCS Program that a
Member desires to utilize, as required by APL 20-012; and
7) The requirement that Contractor ensure all Medically Necessary
Covered Services are provided to the Member if the local CCS
Program does not approve CCS Program eligibility. If the local CCS
Program denies authorization for any service, Contractor remains
responsible for providing and reimbursing for the cost of the ser
vice if it is determined to be Medically Necessary.
B. Authorization for payment must be retroactive to the date the CCS
Program was informed about the Member through an initial referral by
Contractor or a Network Provider. In an emergency admission, Contractor
or a Network Provider must be allowed until the next Working Day to
inform the CCS Program about the Member.
C. Contractor must maintain policies and procedures for identifying CCS-
eligible Members that are aging out of the CCS Program. Within 12
months of a CCS Member aging out of the program, Contractor must
develop a Care Coordination plan to assist the Member in transitioning out
of the CCS Program. The policies and procedures must include, the
following, at a minimum:
1) Identifying the Member’s CCS-Eligible Condition; and any other
programs the Member may be eligible for based upon their CCS
eligible condition;
2) Planning for the needs of the Member to transition from the CCS
Program;
3) A communication plan with the Member in advance of the
transition;
[[page 235]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 235 of 642
4) Identification and coordination of Primary Care and specialty care
Providers appropriate to the Member’s CCS-Eligible Condition(s);
and
5) Continued assessment of the Member through first 12 months of
the transition.
D. Contractor must have Memorandums of Understanding (MOUs) with each
CCS Program within its Service Area that are in accordance with the MOU
requirements in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local
Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third Parties). The MOU
must delineate the roles and responsibilities of Contractor and the CCS
Program for coordinating care and ensuring the non-duplication of
services.
4.3.15 Services for Persons with Developmental Disabilities
A. Contractor must maintain policies and procedures for identifying and
tracking Members with Developmental Disabilities (DD), including all
services they receive.
B. Contractor must designate its own liaison to coordinate with each RC
operating within Contractor’s Service Area to assist Members with DD in
understanding and accessing services, and to act as a central point of
contact for questions, access and care concerns, and problem resolution,
as required by W&I section 14182(c)(10).
C. Contractor must refer Members with DD to a RC for evaluation and for
access to non-medical services provided by the RC, including, but not
limited to, respite, out-of-home placement, and supportive living.
Contractor must have an MOU in place as required in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local Government Agencies,
County Programs, and Third Parties) to coordinate services for the
Member with RC staff to ensure the non-duplication services and to create
the individual developmental services plan required for all Members with
DD, which includes identification of the Member’s medical needs and the
provision of Medically Necessary services such as medical care, NSMHS,
and Behavioral Health Treatment (BHT).
D. Contractor must maintain policies and procedures to identify and refer
eligible Members to the HCBS program administered by the Department
of Developmental Services (DDS).
E. Contractor must refer to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.20
(Home and Community-Based Services Programs) for further coordination
[[page 236]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 236 of 642
of care requirements related to providing HCBS programs through the
HCBS-DD Waiver.
4.3.16 School-Based Services
A. Contractor must have an MOU in place with all LEAs in its Service Area in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Third
Parties) to ensure there are processes that account for facilitating
cooperation and collaboration between the Member’s PCP and the LEA in
the development of the Member’s Individualized Education Plan (IEP) or
the IFSP. Contractor must provide case management and Care
Coordination to the Member, or the parent, legal guardian, or AR, to
ensure the provision of all Medically Necessary Covered Services
identified in the IEP developed by the LEA, with PCP participation.
B. Contractor must cover Medically Necessary mental health and SUD
services as specified by DHCS when delivered by school-linked
behavioral health providers to a Member who is 25 years of age or
younger. Contractor must cover these services in accordance with DHCS
guidance related to the Children and Youth Behavioral Initiative (CYBHI)
and at the DHCS established fee schedule Contractor must execute
agreements in accordance with DHCS guidance and in accordance with
H&S section 1374.722 and W&I section 5963.4(c).
C. By 2025, Contractor is required to provide Covered Services, including
preventive services and adolescent health services provided in schools or
by school-affiliated health providers.
D. Contractor must implement interventions that increase access to
preventive, early intervention, and Behavioral Health Services by school-
affiliated Behavioral Health Providers for Children in publicly funded
childcare and preschool, and TK-12 Children in public schools, in
accordance with the interventions, goals, and metrics set forth in W&I
section 5961.3(b).
4.3.17 Dental
A. Contractor must cover and ensure that dental screenings and oral health
assessments are included for all Members. Contractor must ensure that all
Members are given referrals to appropriate Medi-Cal dental Providers.
Contractor must provide Medically Necessary Federally Required Adult
Dental Services (FRADS), fluoride varnish, and dental services that may
be performed by a medical professional. Dental services that are
exclusively provided by dental Providers are not covered under this
Contract.
[[page 237]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 237 of 642
B. For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must ensure that a
dental screening and an oral health assessment are performed as part of
every periodic assessment, with annual dental referrals beginning with the
eruption of the Member’s first tooth or at 12 months of age, whichever
occurs first.
C. Contractor must ensure the provision of Medically Necessary dental-
related Covered Services that are not exclusively provided by dentists or
dental anesthetists. Contractor must also have an identified Contractor
liaison available to Medi-Cal dental Providers to assist with referring the
Member to other Covered Services. Other Covered Services include, but
are not limited to laboratory services, and pre-admission physical
examinations required for admission to an outpatient surgical service
center, or an in-patient hospitalization required for a dental procedure
(including facility fees and anesthesia services for both inpatient and
outpatient services). Contractor may require Prior Authorization for
Medically Necessary Covered Services needed in support of dental
procedures.
If Contractor requires Prior Authorization in support of dental procedures,
Contractor must develop and publish the policies and procedures for
obtaining Prior Authorization for dental services to ensure that services
are provided to the Member in a timely manner. Contractor must
coordinate with DHCS Medi-Cal Dental Services Division in the
development of their policies and procedures pertaining to Prior
Authorization for dental services and must submit such policies and
procedures to DHCS for review and approval.
4.3.18 Direct Observed Therapy for Treatment of Tuberculosis
Contractor must assess the risk of treatment resistance or noncompliance with
drug therapy for each Member who requires placement on anti-tuberculosis drug
therapy.
A. The following groups are at risk for treatment resistance or noncompliance
for the treatment of Tuberculosis (TB):
1) Members with demonstrated resistance to Isoniazid and Rifampin;
2) Members whose treatment has failed or who have relapsed after
completing a prior regimen;
3) Substance users;
4) Members with mental health conditions or SUD;
[[page 238]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 238 of 642
5) Elderly, Children and adolescent Members;
6) Members with unmet housing needs;
7) Members with language and/or cultural barriers; and
8) Members who have demonstrated noncompliance by failing to keep
office appointments.
B. Contractor must refer Members with active TB and Members who have
treatment resistance or non-compliance issue risks to the TB control
officer of the LHD for Direct Observed Therapy (DOT). If a Provider finds
that a Member is at risk for treatment resistance or noncompliance with
treatment, Contractor must refer the Member to the LHD for DOT.
C. Contractor must have an MOU in place as required in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local Government Agencies,
County Programs, and Third Parties) to ensure joint case management
and Care Coordination with the LHD TB Control Officer. Contractor must
provide all Medically Necessary Covered Services to Members with TB on
DOT.
4.3.19 Women, Infants, and Children Supplemental Nutrition Program
A. Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) services are not covered under this
Contract. However, Contractor must maintain procedures to identify and
refer eligible Members for WIC services. Contractor must also have an
MOU in place as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs
with Local Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third Parties) to
ensure referrals. As part of the referral process, Contractor must provide
the WIC program with the Member’s current hemoglobin or hematocrit
laboratory value. Contractor must also document the laboratory values
and the referral in the Member’s Medical Record.
B. Contractor must refer, and document the referral of, Members who are
pregnant, breastfeeding, or postpartum, or a legal guardian for a Member
under the age of five, to the WIC program either as part of the initial
evaluation of newly pregnant women pursuant to 42 CFR section
431.635(c) and PL 98-010.
4.3.20 Home and Community-Based Services Programs
A. DHCS administers, either directly or through another State entity, a
number of Medi-Cal Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS)
programs authorized under the Medi-Cal program. HCBS programs
provide long-term community-based services and supports to eligible
[[page 239]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 239 of 642
Members in the community setting of their choice instead of in an
institution.
B. Contractor must continue to provide all Covered Services to a Member
when that Member is enrolled in, or applying to enroll in, receiving, or
applying to receive an HCBS program other than this Contract. Contractor
must continuously collaborate and exchange Member health care and
medical information with all third-party entities providing the Member with
Medi-Cal HCBS or administering a Medi-Cal-funded HCBS program
pursuant to the third-party entity’s contractual or legal authority to
administer Medi-Cal-funded HCBS programs and/or provide HCBS to the
Member. Such third-party entities include, but are not limited to:
1) DHCS;
2) State departments that operate or administer Medi-Cal programs
offering HCBS pursuant to legal authority and/or Inter-Agency
Agreements with DHCS, including but not limited to, the California
Department of Social Services; the California Department of
Developmental Services, the California Department of Public
Health (CDPH), and the California Department of Aging;
3) Home and Community Based Alternatives Waiver agencies;
4) Assisted Living Waiver Care Coordination agencies;
5) RCs;
6) Multipurpose Senior Services Program sites;
7) Medi-Cal Waiver Program agencies; and
8) California Community Transitions lead organizations.
C. Contractor must maintain procedures to identify Members who may
benefit from Medi-Cal HCBS programs and refer Members to the third-
party entity administrating the HCBS program. The HCBS programs
include, but are not limited to HCBS programs authorized under the Social
Security Act (SSA) at 42 USC section 1396n(c), the California Medicaid
State Plan option authorized under 42 USC section 1396n(k), California
Medicaid State Plan HCBS benefits authorized under 42 USC section
1396n(k), and other State and federally-funded Medi-Cal HCBS programs.
If the Member is then authorized to receive Medi-Cal-funded HCBS
program services, the Member must remain enrolled with Contractor and
Contractor must continue to provide all services and benefits covered
under this Contract to the Member.
[[page 240]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 240 of 642
D. Contractor’s collaboration with third-party entities providing the Member
with HCBS program services or administering a HCBS program pursuant
to the third-party entity’s contractual or legal authority to administer HCBS
programs and/or provide HCBS program services to the Member, must
include, but is not limited to:
1) Maintaining staff assigned to coordinate with such third-party
entities that is sufficient to assist Members in understanding and
accessing HCBS program services, and to act as a central point of
contact for questions, access, and Care Coordination concerns.
2) Working in collaboration with such third-party entities’ care
managers and Providers to coordinate Covered Services, all HCBS
program services, and any other relevant medical or supportive
services. Such coordination must include, but is not limited to, the
timely exchange of information regarding the Member and their
health care needs, services, and efforts to obtain and arrange for
the provision of both Medi-Cal and non-Medi-Cal programs
pursuant to DHCS guidance to Contractor and HCBS Providers.
3) As contracted delegates of the State, Contractor and such third-
party entities administering HCBS programs and/or providing HCBS
program services are authorized to share Member information with
one another, including PHI/Personal Identifiable Information (PII) in
accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) and Exhibit G of this Contract, because both are under
a contract with DHCS, are legally authorized to receive such
information, and/or are responsible for administration of the Medi-
Cal program, complying with the provisions within their respective
Business Associate Agreements with the State, and sharing this
information with each other as part of their contractual
responsibilities pursuant to and in compliance with 45 CFR sections
164.502(a)(1)(ii), 164.502(a)(3), and 164.506(c).
4.3.21 In-Home Supportive Services
Contractor must maintain policies and procedures for identifying and referring
eligible Members to the county IHSS program. Contractor’s procedures must
address the following requirements, at a minimum:
A. Processes for coordinating with the county IHSS agency that ensures
Members do not receive duplicative services through ECM, Community
Supports, and other services;
[[page 241]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 241 of 642
B. Track all Members receiving IHSS and continue coordinating services with
the county IHSS agency for Members until IHSS notifies Contractor that
IHSS is no longer needed for the Member;
C. Designate a person to serve, as the day-to-day IHSS liaison with county
IHSS agency.
1) Contractor, in collaboration with county IHSS agency, must ensure
Contractor’s IHSS liaison is sufficiently trained on IHSS
assessment and referral processes and providers, and how
Contractor and Primary Care Providers can support IHSS eligibility
applications and coordinate care across IHSS, medical services,
and long-term services and supports. This includes training on
IHSS referrals for Members in inpatient and Skilled Nursing Facility
settings as a part of Transitional Care Service requirements, to
support safe and stable transitions to home and community-based
settings.
2) The IHSS liaison functions may be assigned to the LTSS liaison as
long as they meet the training requirements and have the expertise
to work with the county IHSS liaison.
D. Outreach and coordinate with the county IHSS agency for any Members
identified by DHCS as receiving IHSS;
E. Upon identifying Members receiving, referred to, or approved for IHSS,
conduct a reassessment of Members’ Risk Tier, per the population RSS
and Risk Tiering requirements in this Section; and
F. Continue to provide Basic PHM and Care Coordination of all Medically
Necessary services while Members receive IHSS.
4.3.22 Indian Health Care Providers
Contractor must have an identified tribal liaison dedicated to working with each
Indian Health Care Provider (IHCP) in its Service Area and responsible for
coordinating referrals and payment for services provided to Indian Members who
are qualified to receive services from an IHCP, in accordance with the
requirements in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.7 (Federally Qualified
Health Center, Rural Health Center, and Indian Health Care Provider).
4.3.23 Justice Involved Reentry Coordination
Contractor must maintain policies and procedures for coordinating with
Correctional Facilities and pre-release care managers in order to support
Members who are leaving a Correctional Facility and reentering the community.
[[page 242]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 242 of 642
Such policies and procedures must include all requirements as detailed in the
Policy and Operational Guide for Planning and Implementing CalAIM Justice-
Involved Initiative, including:
A. A designated Justice Involved liaison, as required in Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 4.3.24 (Managed Care Liaisons);
B. Assigning ECM Providers to serve as pre-release care managers and/or
as post-release ECM Providers for Justice Involved Individuals;
C. Coordinating the Member’s transition from the pre-release to the post-
release period, including any needed data sharing; and
D. Ensuring the provision of any Medically Necessary Covered Services
including ECM, physical and behavioral health services, Community
Supports, NEMT, and Non-Medical Transportation (NMT).
4.3.24 Managed Care Liaisons
Contractor must designate an individual or set of individuals to serve as the day-
to-day liaisons for specific services and programs as set forth in the list below to
ensure services are closely coordinated with Member’s other services and to
ensure effective oversight and delivery of services.
Liaisons must receive training on the full spectrum of rules and regulations
pertaining to the service they are coordinating, including referral requirements
and processes, care management, and authorization processes.
Contractor must notify the other party, for which they are serving as a liaison, of
any changes to the liaison as soon as reasonably practical but no later than the
date of change and must notify DHCS within five (5) days of the change.
Pursuant to the obligations set forth in this section, Contractor must designate
the following liaisons:
A. Tribal liaison as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.22
(Indian Health Care Providers)
B. Long-Term Services and Supports (LTSS) Liaison
LTSS Liaisons must receive training on the rules and regulations
pertaining to Medi-Cal covered LTC, including payment and coverage
policies; prompt claims payment requirements; Provider resolutions,
policies and procedures; and care management, coordination and
transition policies.
[[page 243]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 243 of 642
C. Transportation Liaison
Contractor must have a direct line for Providers and Members to receive
real-time assistance directly from Contractor with unresolved
transportation issues that can result in missed appointments. The liaison
role may not be delegated to a transportation broker. Contractor must also
have a process to triage urgent transportation calls when the Member or
Provider communicates that they have attempted to work with the broker
but the issue remains unresolved and is time sensitive.
D. C alifornia Children’s Services Liaison
Contractor must have a CCS liaison(s) that serves as the primary point(s)
of contact for the coordination of services between Contractor and county
CCS Program to ensure the appropriate communication and care
coordination are ongoing between the Contractor and county CCS
Program, facilitate quarterly meetings, and provide updates to the county
CCS Program as appropriate. CCS liaison(s) must receive training on the
full spectrum of rules and regulations pertaining to the CCS Program,
including referral requirements and processes, annual medical review
processes with counties, care management and authorization processes
for CCS Children.
E. County Child Welfare Liaison
1) Contractor must designate at least one individual to serve as the
county child welfare liaison who will serve as a leader within
Contractor to be the point of contact for child welfare departments
and be the advocate on behalf of Members involved in county child
welfare. Additional county child liaisons must be designated as
needed to ensure the needs of Members involved with county child
welfare are met.
2) Contractor’s county child welfare liaison(s) will follow DHCS-issued
standards and expectations as set forth in APLs or other similar
instructions. Contractor's county child welfare liaison must:
a) Have expertise in Child welfare services, County Behavioral
Health Services.
b) Ensure appropriate ECM staff, including the ECM Lead Care
Manager whenever possible, attend meetings of the Child
and family teams, in accordance W&I section 16501(a)(4),
and ensure Covered services are closely coordinated with
other services, including social services and Specialty
Mental Health Care Services.
[[page 244]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 244 of 642
c) Act as a resource to ECM Providers providing services to
Child welfare-involved Children and youth, provide technical
assistance to Contractor and ECM Provider staff as needed,
and serve as a point of escalation for care managers if they
face operational obstacles when working with County and
community partners.
d) Be sufficiently trained on County Care Coordination and
assessment processes.
e) Provide resources and support to Member’s care manager
about Medi-Cal managed care plan Enrollment and
disenrollment when they are made aware that the Member
will move to a different county.
F. Justice Involved Liaison
1) Contractor must have an assigned Justice Involved liaison for
justice involved reentry coordination, which may be one individual
or multiple identified individuals, and make available information
related to the Justice Involved liaison’s title, name, contact phone
number and email address.
2) The Justice Involved liaison must be available to support
Correctional Facilities, pre-release care management Providers,
and/or ECM Providers in the reentry planning process as required
in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.23 (Justice Involved
Reentry Coordination) and further specified in the Policy and
Operational Guide for Planning and Implementing CalAIM Justice
Involved Initiative.
G. RC Liaison as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.15
(Services for Persons with Developmental Disabilities)
H. Dental Liaison as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.17
(Dental)
I. IHSS Liaison as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.21
(In-Home Support Services)
[[page 245]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 245 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
4.4 Enhanced Care Management
4.4.1 Contractor’s Responsibilities for Administration of Enhanced Care
Management
4.4.2 Populations of Focus for Enhanced Care Management
4.4.3 Enhanced Care Management Providers
4.4.4 Enhanced Care Management Provider Capacity
4.4.5 Enhanced Care Management Model of Care
4.4.6 Member Identification for Enhanced Care Management
4.4.7 Authorizing Members for Enhanced Care Management
4.4.8 Assignment to an Enhanced Care Management Provider
4.4.9 Initiating Delivery of Enhanced Care Management
4.4.10 Discontinuation of Enhanced Care Management
4.4.11 Core Service Components of Enhanced Care Management
4.4.12 Data System Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Enhanced Care
Management
4.4.13 Oversight of Enhanced Care Management Providers
4.4.14 Payment of Enhanced Care Management Providers
4.4.15 Enhanced Care Management Reporting Requirements
4.4.16 Enhanced Care Management Quality and Performance Incentive Program
[[page 246]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 246 of 642
4.4 Enhanced Care Management
4.4.1 Contractor’s Responsibilities for Administration of Enhanced Care
Management
A. Contractor must follow all provisions in the Enhanced Care Management
(ECM) Policy Guide, in addition to provisions outlined in this Contract.
B. Contractor must take a whole-person approach to offering ECM, ensuring
that ECM addresses the clinical and non-clinical needs of high-need and
high-cost Members in distinct Populations of Focus, Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 4.4.2 (Populations of Focus for Enhanced Care
Management), through systematic coordination of services and
comprehensive care management.
C. Contractor must ensure ECM is community-based, interdisciplinary, high-
touch, and person-centered.
D. Contractor must ensure ECM is available throughout its Service Area.
E. Contractor must ensure ECM is offered primarily through in-person
interaction where Members and their family members, legal guardians,
Authorized Representatives (ARs), caregivers, and authorized support
persons live, seek care, or prefer to access services in their local
community. Contractor must ensure its ECM Providers focus on building
relationships with Members, and in-person visits may be supplemented
with secure teleconferencing and Telehealth, when appropriate and with
the Member’s consent.
F. In situations where Contractor is performing ECM functions using
Contractor’s own staff, Contractor must follow the same requirements as
an ECM Provider that is a Network Provider or Subcontractor, specifically
that all such services are community-based, interdisciplinary, high-touch
and person-centered. All such situations require DHCS approval through
the exemption process and plans must be also making demonstrable
progress to moving these ECM functions to community-based providers.
G. Contractor must follow the appropriate processes to ensure Members who
may benefit from ECM receive ECM as defined in this Contract.
H. Contractor must ensure ECM provided to each Member encompasses the
ECM core service components described in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.4.11 (Core Service Components of Enhanced Care
Management).
[[page 247]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 247 of 642
I. Contractor must ensure a Member receiving ECM is not receiving
duplicative case management services from other sources, including but
not limited to county-specific Targeted Case Management (TCM) services
administered by Local Governmental Agencies (LGAs).
J. For Members who are dually eligible for Medicare and Medi-Cal and
enrolled in a Medicare Advantage Plan, Contractor must coordinate with
the Medicare Advantage Plan for the provision of ECM for those
Members.
K. Contractor must develop Member-facing written material about ECM for
use across its network of ECM Providers. The written material must be
submitted for DHCS review and approval prior to use. This material must
include the following, at a minimum:
1) Explain ECM and how a Member may to request it;
2) Maintain a list of ECM Providers as part of its Provider Directory,
adherent to requirements established in the ECM Policy Guide;
3) Explain that ECM participation is voluntary and can be discontinued
at any time;
4) Explain that the Member must authorize ECM-related data sharing;
5) Describe the process by which the Member may choose a different
ECM Lead Care Manager or ECM Provider; and
6) Meet standards for culturally and linguistically appropriate
communication Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11
(Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees) and in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.3 (Member Information).
4.4.2 Populations of Focus for Enhanced Care Management
A. Subject to the phase-in and Member transition requirements described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.6 (Member Identification for
Enhanced Care Management).
B. Contractor must provide ECM to Members that meet the eligibility criteria
for at least one of the following Populations of Focus, as described in the
ECM Policy Guide:
1) Members experiencing homelessness:
[[page 248]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 248 of 642
a) Members without dependent Children/youth living with them
experiencing homelessness; and
b) Homeless families or unaccompanied Children/youth
experiencing homelessness.
2) Members at risk for avoidable hospital or emergency department
utilization;
3) Members with serious mental health and/or Substance Use
Disorder (SUD) needs;
4) Members transitioning from incarceration;
5) Adult Members living in the community and at risk for Long-Term
Care (LTC) institutionalization;
6) A Member residing in an adult nursing facility transitioning to the
community;
7) Children enrolled in California Children’s Services (CCS) or CCS
Whole Child Model (WCM) with additional needs beyond the CCS
condition;
8) Children involved in Child welfare; and
9) Birth equity population of focus.
C. Contractor may offer ECM to Members who do not meet Population of
Focus criteria in full but may benefit from ECM.
D. Contractor must follow all applicable DHCS policies and guidance,
including All Plan Letters (APLs) and the ECM Policy Guide, that further
define the approach to ECM for each Population of Focus, including the
eligibility criteria for each Population of Focus and the phase-in timeline for
Populations of Focus, and the JI Policy and Operations guide, that further
define the approach to ECM for the Justice Involved Population of Focus.
E. To avoid duplication between existing care management and coordination
approaches, Members are excluded from ECM while enrolled in the
following programs:
1) 1915(c) waiver programs including:
a) Multipurpose Senior Services Program (MSSP);
[[page 249]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 249 of 642
b) Assisted Living Waiver (ALW);
c) Home and Community-Based Alternatives (HCBA) Waiver;
d) Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune
Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) Waiver;
e) HCBS programs for Individuals with Developmental
Disabilities (DD); and
f) Self-Determination Program for Individuals with intellectual
and DD.
2) Fully integrated programs for Members dually eligible for Medicare
and Medicaid including:
a) Fully Integrated Dual Eligible Special Needs Plans (FIDE-
SNPs);
b) Program for All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE);
c) Exclusively Aligned Enrollment (EAE) Dual Special Needs
Plans (D-SNPs); and
d) Non EAE D-SNPs.
3) California Community Transitions (CCT) Money Follows the Person
(MFTP)
4) Complex Care Management (CCM)
4.4.3 Enhanced Care Management Providers
A. Contractor must ensure ECM is provided primarily through in-person
interaction in settings that are most appropriate for the Member, such as
where the Member lives, seeks care, or prefers to access services in their
local community.
B. ECM Providers may include, but are not limited to, the following entities:
1) Counties;
2) County Behavioral Health Providers;
3) Primary Care Provider (PCP) or Specialist or Physician groups;
[[page 250]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 250 of 642
4) Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs);
5) Community health centers;
6) Community-based organizations;
7) Hospitals or hospital-based Physician groups or clinics (including
public hospitals or district or municipal public hospitals);
8) Rural Health Clinics (RHCs) or Indian Health Care Providers
(IHCP);
9) Local Health Departments (LHDs);
10) Behavioral Health entities;
11) Community mental health centers;
12) SUD treatment Providers;
13) Community Health Workers (CHW);
14) Organizations serving individuals experiencing homelessness;
15) Organizations serving justice-involved individuals;
16) CCS Providers; and
17) Other qualified Providers or entities that are not listed above, as
approved by DHCS.
C. For the Population of Focus for eligible individuals with Serious Mental
Illness (SMI) or SUD and the Population of Focus for eligible individuals
with Contractor must prioritize county Behavioral Health staff or Behavioral
Health Providers to serve in the ECM Provider role, provided they agree
and are able to coordinate all services needed by those Populations of
Focus, not just their Behavioral Health Services.
D. Contractor must attempt to contract with each IHCP as set forth in 22 CCR
sections 55110 through 55180 to provide ECM, when applicable, as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.7 (Federally
Qualified Health Center, Rural Health Center, and Indian Health Care
Provider).
[[page 251]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 251 of 642
E. Contractor must ensure ECM Providers meet the requirements set forth in
APLs including but not limited to the requirements regarding the use of a
care management documentation system.
F. Care management documentation systems may include certified
electronic health record technology, or other documentation tools that can:
1) Document Member goals and goal attainment status;
2) Develop and assign care team tasks;
3) Define and support Member Care Coordination and Care
Management needs; and
4) Gather information from other sources to identify Member needs
and support care team coordination and communication; and
support notifications regarding Member health status and
transitions in care (e.g., discharges from a hospital, LTC facility,
housing status).
G. Contractor must also comply with requirements on data exchange
pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.12 (Data System
Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Enhanced Care
Management).
H. Contractor must ensure all ECM Providers for whom a State-level
Enrollment pathway exists enroll in Medi-Cal, pursuant to relevant APLs,
including APL 22-013 (Provider Credentialing/Recredentialing and
Screening/Enrollment). If APL 22-013 does not apply to an ECM Provider,
Contractor must have a process for verifying qualifications and experience
of ECM Providers, which must extend to individuals employed by or
delivering services on behalf of the ECM Provider. Contractor must ensure
that all ECM Providers meet the capabilities and standards required to be
an ECM Provider.
I. Contractor must not require eligible ECM Providers to be National
Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA) certified or accredited as a
condition of entering into a Subcontractor Agreement or Network Provider
Agreement, as appropriate.
J. Contractor must ensure ECM Providers serving the Justice Involved
Population of Focus meet not only the standard ECM Provider
requirements, but requirements outlined in the JI Policy and Operational
Guide for Planning and Implementing the Justice Involved Initiative,
including, but not limited to:
[[page 252]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 252 of 642
1) M eeting the following criteria pertaining to participation in pre-
release care management services and warm handoffs:
a) If the Correctional Facilities in the ECM Provider’s county of
operation leverage an in-reach care management model,
Contractor must ensure that JI ECM Providers offer pre-
release care management services as in-reach care
management Providers and continue to serve the Member
post-release as the Member’s ECM Provider.
b) If the Correctional Facilities in the ECM Provider’s county of
operation leverage an embedded care management model,
Contractor must ensure that the ECM Provider participates
in a warm handoff with the pre-release embedded care
manager and the Member.
2) ECM Providers must bill Fee-for-Service (FFS) for all pre-release
care management services and warm handoffs by either enrolling
through the Provider Application and Validation for Enrollment
(PAVE) system or contracting with the Correctional Facility to
provide services billed under the Correctional Facility National
Provider Identifier (NPI).
4.4.4 Enhanced Care Management Provider Capacity
A. Contractor must develop and manage a network of ECM Providers.
B. Contractor must ensure sufficient ECM Provider capacity to meet the
unique needs of all ECM Populations of Focus, including by contracting
with providers with specific skills and experience serving specific
Populations of Focus.
C. Contractor must meet DHCS’ requirements regarding ECM Provider
capacity separately from general Network adequacy; ECM Provider
capacity does not alter the general Network adequacy provisions in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Section 5.2 (Network and Access to Care).
D. Contractor must report on its ECM Provider capacity to DHCS initially in its
ECM Model of Care (MOC) Template as referenced in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.5 (Enhanced Care Management Model of
Care) and on an ongoing basis pursuant to DHCS reporting requirements
in a form and manner specified by DHCS.
E. Contractor must report to DHCS any Significant Changes in its ECM
Provider capacity as soon as possible but no later than 60 days from the
[[page 253]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 253 of 642
occurrence of the change, in accordance with DHCS reporting
requirements in a form and manner specified by DHCS.
F. If Contractor is unable to provide sufficient capacity to meet the needs of
all ECM Populations of Focus through Subcontractor or Network Provider
Agreements, as appropriate, with community-based ECM Providers,
Contractor may submit a written request to DHCS for an exception that
authorizes Contractor to use its own personnel for ECM. Any such request
must be submitted in accordance with DHCS guidelines and must meet at
least one of the following criteria:
1) There are insufficient ECM Providers, or a lack of ECM Providers
with qualifications and experience, to provide ECM for one or more
of the Populations of Focus in one or more counties;
2) There is a justified Quality of Care concern with one or more of the
otherwise qualified ECM Providers;
3) Contractor and the ECM Providers are unable to agree on rates;
4) ECM Providers are unwilling to contract;
5) ECM Providers are unresponsive to multiple attempts to contract;
6) ECM Providers who have a State-level pathway to Medi-Cal
Enrollment but are unable to comply with the Medi-Cal Enrollment
process or Contractor’s verification requirements for ECM
Providers; or
7) ECM Providers without a State-level pathway to Medi-Cal
Enrollment that are unable to comply with Contractor’s verification
requirements for ECM Providers.
G. During an exception period approved by DHCS, Contractor must take
steps to continually develop and increase its ECM Network capacity. After
the expiration of an exception period, Contractor must submit a new
exception request to DHCS for DHCS review and approval on a case-by-
case basis.
H. Contractor’s failure to provide network capacity that meets the needs of all
ECM Populations of Focus in a community-based manner may result in
imposition of Corrective Action proceedings, and may result in sanctions
pursuant to Exhibit E, Section 1.19 (Sanctions).
I. Contractor must ensure Network overlap of the Justice Involved pre-
release care management Provider network and the Justice Involved ECM
[[page 254]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 254 of 642
Provider network across Contractor’s Service Area. Contractor must
submit to DHCS, for prior approval, any requests for exception from
Network overlap requirements across Medi-Cal managed care plans in the
same county for one of the permissible reasons as described in the JI
Policy and Operational Guide for Planning and Implementing the Justice
Involved Initiative.
4.4.5 Enhanced Care Management Model of Care
A. Contractor must develop an ECM MOC template in accordance with the
DHCS-approved MOC Template. The MOC must specify Contractor’s
framework for providing ECM, including a listing of its ECM Providers and
policies and procedures for partnering with ECM Providers for the
provision of ECM.
B. In developing and executing Subcontractor Agreements or Network
Provider Agreements, as appropriate, with ECM Providers, Contractor
must incorporate all requirements and policies and procedures described
in its MOC, in addition to APLs.
C. Contractor may collaborate with other Medi-Cal managed care health
plans within the same county on the development of its MOC as
applicable for Contractor’s plan model.
D. Contractor must submit its ECM MOC for DHCS review and approval.
Contractor must also submit to DHCS any Significant Changes to its MOC
for DHCS review and approval at least 60 calendar days in advance of
any occurrence of changes or updates, in accordance with DHCS policies
and guidance, including APLs. Significant Changes may include, but are
not limited to, changes to Contractor’s approach to administering or
delivering ECM services, approved policies and procedures, and
Subcontractor Agreement and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement
boilerplates.
4.4.6 Member Identification for Enhanced Care Management
A. Contractor must proactively identify Members who may benefit from ECM
and who meet the eligibility criteria for the ECM Populations of Focus, as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.2 (Populations of
Focus for Enhanced Care Management).
B. To identify such Members, Contractor must consider the following:
1) Members’ health care utilization;
2) Needs across physical, behavioral, developmental, and oral health;
[[page 255]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 255 of 642
3) Health risks and needs due to Social Drivers of Health; and,
4) Long-Term Services and Supports needs.
C. Contractor must identify Members for ECM through the following
pathways:
1) Analysis of Contractor’s own enrollment, claims, and other relevant
data and available information. Contractor must use data analytics
to identify Members who may benefit from ECM and who meet the
criteria for the ECM Populations of Focus. Contractor must consider
data sources, including but not limited to:
a) Enrollment data;
b) Encounter Data;
c) Utilization/claims data;
d) Pharmacy data;
e) Laboratory data;
f) Screening or assessment data;
g) Clinical information on physical and Behavioral Health;
h) SMI/SED/SUD data, if available;
i) Risk stratification information for Children in County
Organized Health System (COHS) counties with WCM
programs;
j) Information about Social Drivers of Health, including
standardized assessment tools including Protocol for
Responding to and Assessing Patients' Assets, Risks, and
Experiences (PRAPARE) and International Classification of
Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-10) codes;
k) Results from any available Adverse Childhood Experience
(ACE) screening; and
l) Other cross-sector data and information, including housing,
social services, foster care, criminal justice history, and other
information relevant to the ECM Populations of Focus (e.g.,
[[page 256]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 256 of 642
Homeless Management Information System (HMIS),
available data from the education system).
2) Receipt of requests from ECM Providers and other Providers or
community-based entities.
a) Contractor must accept requests for ECM on behalf of
Members from:
i. ECM Providers;
ii. Social service or other Providers; and
iii. Community-based entities, including those contracted
to provide Community Supports, as described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.3
(Community Supports Providers).
b) Contractor must designate an email and dedicated phone
number that is widely available by which referrals can be
made.
c) Contractor must directly engage with and provide training to
Network Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and county agencies to inform these entities
of ECM, the ECM Populations of Focus, and how to request
ECM for Members, with the goal of having the majority of
ECM eligible Member referrals coming from Providers and
community sources, rather than Contractor identification.
d) Contractor must encourage ECM Providers to identify
Members who meet the criteria for the ECM Populations of
Focus, and must develop a process for receiving and
responding to requests from ECM Providers.
3) Requests from Members
a) Contractor must have a process for allowing Members to
request ECM and for Members’ parents, family members,
legal guardians, ARs, caregivers, and authorized support
persons to request ECM on a Member’s behalf.
b) Contractor must provide information to Members regarding
the Member initiated ECM request and approval process.
[[page 257]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 257 of 642
4) For pre-release services under the Justice Involved Reentry
Initiative, Contractor must have processes that:
a) Identify any Member who received pre-release services for
presumptive eligibility and enrollment in ECM, including
using the JI aid code for enrolled Members.
b) Receive notifications of pre-release services from
Correctional Facilities or their contracted pre-release care
managers through their JI liaison.
c) Receive notifications from the ECM Provider who is acting
as the pre-release care manager or who has received a
warm handoff.
4.4.7 Authorizing Members for Enhanced Care Management
A. Contractor must authorize ECM for each eligible Member identified
through any of the pathways described in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.4.6 (Member Identification for Enhanced Care
Management). If a Member meets ECM Population of Focus eligibility
requirements, Contractor must authorize ECM without additional
requirements.
B. Contractor must develop policies and procedures that explain how it will
authorize ECM for eligible Members in an equitable and non-
discriminatory manner.
C. For requests from Providers and other external entities, Members,
Member’s parent, family member, legal guardian, AR, caregiver, or
authorized support person:
1) Contractor must ensure that authorization or a decision not to
authorize ECM occurs as soon as possible and in accordance with
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.3.2 (Timeframes for Medical
Authorization) and APL 21-011;
2) If Contractor does not authorize ECM, Contractor must ensure the
Member and the requesting individual or entity who requested ECM
on a Member’s behalf, as applicable, are informed of the Member’s
right to Appeal and the Appeals process by way of the Notice of
Action (NOA) process as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.1.5 (Notices of Action for Denial, Deferral, or
Modification of Prior Authorization Requests), and Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal
System) and APL 21-011; and
[[page 258]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 258 of 642
3) Contractor must follow its standard Grievances and Appeals
process outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member
Grievance and Appeal System) and APL 21-011.
D. Contractor may collaborate with its ECM Providers to develop a process
and identify possible circumstances under which presumptive
authorization or preauthorization of ECM may occur, where select ECM
Providers may directly authorize ECM for a limited period of time until
Contractor authorizes or denies ECM.
E. Contractor must authorize ECM services for all Members who were found
eligible for pre-release services under the CalAIM Justice Involved
Reentry Initiative. ECM services are authorized for 12 months per the
Policy and Operational Guide for Planning and Implementing CalAIM
Justice-Involved Reentry Initiative.
F. To inform Members that ECM has been authorized , Contractor must
follow its standard notice process outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.1.5 (Notices of Action for Denial, Deferral, or Modification of
Prior Authorization Requests) and APL 21-011.
4.4.8 Assignment to an Enhanced Care Management Provider
A. Contractor must assign every Member authorized for ECM to an ECM
Provider. Contractor may assign Members to Contractor itself only with a
DHCS-approved exception to the ECM Provider contracting requirement
as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.4 (Enhanced
Care Management Provider Capacity).
B. Contractor must develop a process to disseminate information of assigned
Members to ECM Providers on a regular basis.
C. Contractor must ensure communication of Member Assignment to the
designated ECM Provider occurs within ten Working Days of authorization
or on an agreed upon schedule.
D. Pursuant to the Policy and Operational Guide for Planning and
Implementing CalAIM Justice-Involved Reentry Initiative, for Members
eligible for pre-release services under the CalAIM Justice Involved
Reentry 1115 Initiative, Contractor must, to the extent possible, assign an
ECM Provider that was the pre-release care manager or the care manager
who received a warm handoff from the Correctional Facility while the
individual was incarcerated.
[[page 259]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 259 of 642
E. If a Member prefers a specific ECM Provider, Contractor must assign the
Member to that Provider, to the extent practicable.
F. If a Member’s assigned PCP is a contracted ECM Provider, Contractor
must assign the Member to the PCP as the ECM Provider, unless the
Member indicates otherwise or Contractor identifies a more appropriate
ECM Provider given the Member’s individual needs and health conditions.
G. If a Member receives services from a MHP for SED, SUD, or SMI and the
Member’s Behavioral Health Provider is a contracted ECM Provider,
Contractor must assign that Member to that Behavioral Health Provider as
the ECM Provider, unless the Member indicates otherwise or Contractor
identifies a more appropriate ECM Provider given the Member’s individual
needs and health conditions.
H. If a Member is enrolled in CCS and the Member’s CCS Case Manager is
Affiliated with a contracted ECM Provider, Contractor must assign that
Member to that CCS Case Manager as the ECM Provider, unless the
Member or parent, legal guardian, or AR has indicated otherwise or
Contractor identifies a more appropriate ECM Provider given the
Member’s individual needs and health conditions.
I. Contractor must notify the Member’s PCP, if different from the ECM
Provider, of the assignment to the ECM Provider, within ten Working Days
of the date of assignment.
J. Contractor must document the Member’s ECM Lead Care Manager in its
system of record.
K. Contractor must permit Members to change ECM Providers at any time.
Contractor must implement any Member’s request to change their ECM
Provider within 30 calendar days to the extent practicable.
4.4.9 Initiating Delivery of Enhanced Care Management
A. Contractor must not require Member authorization for ECM-related data
sharing (whether in writing or otherwise) as a condition of initiating delivery
of ECM, unless such authorization is required by federal law.
B. Contractor must develop policies and procedures for its network of ECM
Providers that meet the following requirements, including but not limited
to:
1) Where required by law, ECM Providers must obtain Member’s
authorization to share information with Contractor and all others
[[page 260]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 260 of 642
involved in the Member’s care to maximize the benefits of ECM;
and
2) ECM Providers must provide Contractor with Member-level records
of any obtained authorizations for ECM-related data sharing as
required by federal law and to facilitate ongoing data sharing with
Contractor.
C. Contractor must ensure that upon the initiation of ECM, each Member
receiving ECM has an ECM Lead Care Manager with responsibility for
interacting directly with the Member and the Member’s family, legal
guardians, ARs, caregivers, and other authorized support persons, as
appropriate.
The assigned ECM Lead Care Manager is responsible for engaging with a
multi-disciplinary care team to identify any gaps in the Member’s care and,
at a minimum, ensure effective coordination of all physical health care,
behavioral, developmental, oral health, LTSS, Community Supports, and
other services to address Social Drivers of Health, regardless of setting.
D. Contractor must ensure accurate and up-to-date Member-level records
related to the provision of ECM services are maintained for Members
authorized for ECM.
4.4.10 Discontinuation of Enhanced Care Management
A. Contractor must ensure Members are able to decline or end ECM upon
initial outreach and engagement, or at any other time.
B. Contractor must require the ECM Provider to notify Contractor to
discontinue ECM for Members when any of the following circumstances
are met:
1) The Member has met all care plan goals;
2) The Member is ready to transition to a lower level of care;
3) The Member no longer wishes to receive ECM or is unresponsive
or unwilling to engage; or
4) The ECM Provider has not been able to connect with the Member
after multiple attempts.
C. Contractor must develop processes to determine if the Member is no
longer authorized to receive ECM and, if so, to notify the ECM Provider to
initiate discontinuation of services in accordance with the NOA process
[[page 261]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 261 of 642
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.5 (Notices of Action
for Denial, Deferral, or Modification of Prior Authorization Requests);
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal
System); and APL 21-011.
D. Contractor must develop processes for transitioning Members from ECM
to other levels of care management to provide coordination of ongoing
Member needs.
E. Contractor must notify the ECM Provider when ECM has been
discontinued by Contractor.
F. Contractor must notify the Member of the discontinuation of the ECM
benefit and ensure the Member is informed of their right to Appeal and the
Appeals process by way of the NOA process as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.5 (Notices of Action for Denial, Deferral, or
Modification of Prior Authorization Requests), and Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal System) and APL 21-011.
4.4.11 Core Service Components of Enhanced Care Management
Contractor must ensure all Members receive all of the following seven ECM core
service components, as further defined in APLs:
A. Outreach and engagement;
B. Comprehensive assessment and Care Management Plan (CMP);
C. Enhanced coordination of care;
D. Health promotion;
E. Comprehensive transitional care;
F. Member and family supports; and
G. Coordination of and referral to community and social support services.
4.4.12 Data System Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Enhanced Care
Management
A. Contractor must have an IT infrastructure and data analytic capabilities to
support ECM, including the capabilities to:
[[page 262]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 262 of 642
1) Consume and use claims and Encounter Data, as well as other
data types listed in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.6
(Member Identification for Enhanced Care Management);
2) Assign Members to ECM Providers;
3) Keep records of Members receiving ECM and authorizations
necessary for sharing PHI and PI between Contractor and ECM
and other Providers, among ECM Providers and family member(s)
and/or support person(s), whether obtained by ECM Provider or by
Contractor;
4) Securely share data with ECM Providers and other Providers in
support of ECM;
5) Receive, process, and send Encounter Data from ECM Providers to
DHCS;
6) Receive and process supplemental reports from ECM Providers;
7) Send ECM supplemental reports to DHCS; and
8) Open, track, and manage referrals to Community Supports
Providers.
B. To support ECM, Contractor must follow DHCS guidance on data sharing
and provide the following information to all ECM Providers:
1) Member Assignment files, defined as a list of Medi-Cal Members
authorized for ECM and assigned to the ECM Provider;
2) Encounter Data and claims data;
3) Physical, behavioral, administrative, and Social Drivers of Health
data (e.g., HMIS data) for all Members assigned to the ECM
Provider; and
4) Reports of performance on quality measures and metrics, as
requested.
C. Contractor must use defined federal and State standards, specifications,
code sets, and terminologies when sharing physical, behavioral, social,
and administrative data with ECM Providers and with DHCS in
compliance with data exchange policies and procedures, as defined by the
California Health and Human Services Data Exchange Framework, in
accordance with H&S section 130290.
[[page 263]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 263 of 642
4.4.13 Oversight of Enhanced Care Management Providers
A. Contractor must perform oversight of ECM Providers, holding them
accountable to all ECM requirements contained in this Contract, DHCS
policies and guidance, APLs, and Contractor’s MOC.
1) Contractor must evaluate the prospective Subcontractor’s and
Downstream Subcontractor’s ability to perform services as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.4
(Contractor’s Duty to Ensure Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, and Network Provider Compliance);
2) Contractor must ensure the Subcontractor’s and Downstream
Subcontractor’s capacity is sufficient to serve all Populations of
Focus;
3) Contractor must report to DHCS the names of all Subcontractors,
Network Providers, and Downstream Subcontractors by
Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor type and service(s)
provided, and identify the county or counties in which Members are
served as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.3
(Contractor’s Duty to Disclose All Delegated Relationships and to
Submit Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan); and
4) Contractor must make all Subcontractor Agreements or Network
Provider Agreements, as appropriate, available to DHCS upon
request. Such agreements must contain minimum required
information specified by DHCS, including method and amount of
compensation as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
3.1.5.B (Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement
Requirements).
[[page 264]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 264 of 642
B. Contractor may hold ECM Providers responsible for the same reporting
requirements as those Contractor has with DHCS to support data
collection and reporting.
1) Contractor must not impose mandatory reporting requirements that
differ from or are additional to those required for Encounter and
supplemental reporting; and
2) Contractor may collaborate with other Medi-Cal Managed Care
Health Plans within the same county on oversight of ECM
Providers.
C. Contractor must not utilize tools developed or promulgated by NCQA to
perform oversight of ECM Providers, unless by mutual consent with the
ECM Provider.
D. Contractor must provide ECM training and technical assistance to ECM
Providers, including in-person sessions, webinars, or calls, as necessary,
in addition to Network Provider training requirements, as applicable,
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.2.5 (Network Provider
Training).
E. Contractor must ensure the Subcontractor Agreement and Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement mirrors the requirements set forth in this
Contract and in accordance with APLs, as applicable to Subcontractor.
Contractor may collaborate with its Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors on the approach to administration of ECM to minimize
divergence in how ECM will be implemented between Contractor and its
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors, and to ensure a
streamlined, seamless experience for ECM Providers and Members.
4.4.14 Payment of Enhanced Care Management Providers
A. Contractor must pay ECM Providers for the provision of ECM in
accordance with Subcontractor Agreements or Network Provider
Agreements established between Contractor and each ECM Provider.
B. Contractor must ensure that ECM Providers are eligible to receive
payment when ECM is initiated for any given Member, as described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.4.9 (Initiating Delivery of Enhanced
Care Management).
C. Contractor may tie ECM Provider payments to value, including payment
strategies and arrangements that focus on achieving outcomes related to
high-quality care and improved health status.
[[page 265]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 265 of 642
D. Contractor must utilize the claims timeline as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.5 (Claims Processing).
4.4.15 Enhanced Care Management Reporting Requirements
A. Contractor must submit the following data and reports to DHCS to support
DHCS’ oversight of ECM:
1) Encounter Data:
a) Contractor must submit all ECM Encounter Data to DHCS
using national standard specifications and code sets to be
defined by DHCS.
b) Contractor must submit to DHCS all Encounter Data for
ECM services to its Members, regardless of the number of
levels of delegation and/or sub-delegation between
Contractor and the ECM Provider.
c) In the event the ECM Provider is unable to submit ECM
Encounter Data to Contractor using the national standard
specifications and code sets to be defined by DHCS,
Contractor is responsible for converting the ECM Provider’s
Encounter Data information into the national standard
specifications and code sets, for submission to DHCS.
2) ECM supplemental reports, on a schedule and in a format to be
defined by DHCS.
B. Contractor must track and report to DHCS, on a schedule and in a format
specified by DHCS, information about outreach efforts related to Potential
Members to be enrolled in ECM.
C. In the event of underperformance by Contractor in relation to its
administration of ECM, DHCS may impose sanctions as described in
Exhibit E, Section 1.19 (Sanctions).
4.4.16 Enhanced Care Management Quality and Performance Incentive Program
A. Contractor must meet all quality management and Quality Improvement
requirements in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.2 (Quality
Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program (QIHETP)) and
any additional quality requirements set forth in associated guidance from
DHCS for ECM.
[[page 266]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 266 of 642
B. Contractor may participate in a performance incentive program related to
building Provider capacity for ECM, related health care quality and
outcomes, and other performance milestones and measures, in
accordance with APL 23-003 or other technical guidance.
[[page 267]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 267 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
4.5 Community Supports
4.5.1 Contractor’s Responsibility for Administration of Community Supports
4.5.2 DHCS Pre-Approved Community Supports
4.5.3 Community Supports Providers
4.5.4 Community Supports Provider Capacity
4.5.5 Community Supports Model of Care
4.5.6 Identifying Members for Community Supports
4.5.7 Authorizing Members for Community Supports and Communication of
Authorization Status
4.5.8 Referring Members to Community Supports Providers for Community
Supports
4.5.9 Data System Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Community
Supports
4.5.10 Contractor’s Oversight of Community Supports Providers
4.5.11 Delegation of Community Supports Administration to Network Providers,
Subcontractors, or Downstream Subcontractors
4.5.12 Payment of Community Supports Providers
4.5.13 Community Supports Reporting Requirements
4.5.14 Community Supports Quality and Performance Incentive Program
[[page 268]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 268 of 642
4.5 Community Supports
For the purposes of this Section 4.5 (Community Supports), “California Medicaid
State Plan Covered Service or Setting” means any health service or care
environment approved and funded under the California Medicaid State Plan,
such as inpatient services, nursing facilities, or home health care.
4.5.1 Contractor’s Responsibility for Administration of Community Supports
A. Contractor may provide DHCS pre-approved Community Supports as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.2 (DHCS Pre-
Approved Community Supports).
This Section (Section 4.5) refers only to Community Supports that
Contractor may choose to offer, unless otherwise specified.
B. In accordance with 42 Code of ederal Regulations (CFR) section
438.3(e)(2), and the Member rights and protections defined within, all
applicable All Plan Letters (APLs), and the Community Supports Policy
Guide, Contractor may select and offer Community Supports from the list
of Community Supports pre-approved by DHCS as medically appropriate
and cost-effective substitutes for Covered Services or settings under the
California Medicaid State Plan. See Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
4.5.2 (DHCS Pre-Approved Community Supports) below for the list.
1) Contractor must ensure medically appropriate California Medicaid
State Plan services are available to the Member regardless of
whether the Member has been offered Community Supports, is
currently receiving Community Supports, or has received
Community Supports in the past.
2) Contractor must not require a Member to utilize Community
Supports. Members always retain their right to receive the
California Medicaid State Plan services on the same terms as
would apply if Community Supports was not an option in
accordance with regulatory requirements.
3) Contractor must not use Community Supports to reduce,
discourage, or jeopardize Members’ access to California Medicaid
State Plan services.
4) Contractor may submit a request to DHCS to offer Community
Supports in addition to the pre-approved Community Supports.
C. With respect to pre-approved Community Supports, Contractor must
adhere to DHCS guidance on service definitions, eligible populations,
[[page 269]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 269 of 642
code sets, potential Community Supports Providers, and parameters for
each Community Support that Contractor chooses to provide, as
referenced in APL 21-017 and the Community Supports Policy Guide.
1) Contractor is not permitted to extend Community Supports to
Members beyond those for whom DHCS has determined the
Community Supports will be cost-effective and medically
appropriate.
2) Contractor may not adopt a more narrowly defined eligible
population for Community Supports than outlined in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.2 (DHCS Pre-Approved Community
Supports). That Subsection details (i) the name and definition of
each Community Support; (ii) the Covered Services or settings
under the California Medicaid State Plan that each Community
Support may replace; (iii) the target populations for each
Community Support; (iv) Member rights and protections; and (v) the
requirement to use State-designated codes in Encounter Data for
each Community Support.
D. If Contractor elects to offer one or more pre-approved Community
Supports, it need not offer the Community Supports in each county it
serves. Contractor must report to DHCS the counties in which it intends to
offer the Community Supports. Contractor must provide Community
Supports in a county selected by Contractor in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.4
(Community Supports Provider Capacity).
E. Contractor must identify Members for whom Community Supports will be a
medically appropriate alternative to Covered Services, and accept
requests for Community Supports from Members and Members’ Providers
and organizations that serve them, including community-based
organizations as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.6
(Identifying Members for Community Supports).
F. Contractor must authorize Community Supports for Members deemed
eligible in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.7
(Authorizing Members for Community Supports and Communication of
Authorization Status).
G. Contractor may elect to offer value-added services in addition to offering
one or more Community Supports. Offering or not offering Community
Supports does not preclude Contractor from offering value-added
services.
[[page 270]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 270 of 642
H. In the event of any discontinuation of Community Supports resulting in a
change in the availability of services, Contractor must adhere to the
requirements set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.9
(Network and Access Changes to Covered Services).
I. When Members are dually eligible for Medicare and Medi-Cal, and
enrolled in a Medicare Advantage Plan, including a Dual Special Needs
Plan (D-SNP), Contractor must coordinate with the Medicare Advantage
Plan in the provision of Community Supports.
J. Contractor must not require Members to use Community Supports.
4.5.2 DHCS Pre-Approved Community Supports
A. Contractor may choose to offer Members one or more of the following pre-
approved Community Supports, and any subsequent Community Supports
additions pre-approved by DHCS, in each county.
1) Housing transition navigation services
a. Housing transition navigation services assist Members with
obtaining housing through supports such as a housing
assessment, individualized planning, application assistance,
and landlord engagement.
b. Members must meet at least one of the following sets of
eligibility criteria (i, ii, or iii):
i. Members who are prioritized for a permanent
supportive housing unit or rental subsidy resource
through the local homeless coordinated entry system
or similar system designed to use information to
identify highly vulnerable individuals who meet at
least one of the following sets of criteria (a, b, c, d, or
e):
a. Have disabilities;
b. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
c. Have a Serious Mental Illness (SMI);
d. Are at risk of institutionalization or requiring
residential services because of a Substance
Use Disorder (SUD); or
[[page 271]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 271 of 642
e. Are exiting incarceration.
ii. Members who meet the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) definition of
“homeless” as defined in 24 CFR section 91.5
(including those exiting institutions but not including
any limits on the number of days in the institution) and
who meet at least one of the following sets of criteria
(a, b, c, or d):
a. Are receiving Enhanced Care Management
(ECM);
b. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
c. Have a SMI; or
d. Are at risk of institutionalization or requiring
residential services as a result of a SUD.
Qualifying institutions include hospitals,
Correctional Facilities, mental health
residential treatment facilities, SUD residential
treatment facilities, recovery residences,
Institutions for Mental Diseases (IMD), and
state hospitals.
iii. Members who meet the HUD definition of “at risk of
homelessness” as defined in 24 CFR section 91.5
and have significant barriers to housing stability and
meet at least one of the following sets of criteria (a, b,
c, d, e, or f):
a. Are receiving ECM;
b. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
c. Have a SMI;
d. Are at risk of institutionalization or overdose or
are requiring residential services because of a
SUD;
e. Have a Serious Emotional Disturbance (SED)
(children and adolescents); or
[[page 272]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 272 of 642
f. Are a transition-age Youth (aged 16 to 25
years) with significant barriers to housing
stability, such as one or more convictions, a
history of foster care, involvement with the
juvenile justice or criminal justice system,
having a SMI, having a SED, or having been a
victim of trafficking or domestic violence.
c) Housing transition navigation services may serve as an
immediate alternative to a California Medicaid State Plan
covered service or setting, or as a replacement over a longer
timeframe. Housing transition navigation services may
potentially substitute the following California Medicaid State
Plan covered services or settings: emergency department
services, emergency transport services, inpatient services,
outpatient hospital services, outpatient mental health,
rehabilitation center outpatient services, Skilled Nursing
Facility (SNF) services, and transitional inpatient care
services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the housing
transition navigation services rendered using the standard
Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS)
code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by the State, located
at https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
2) Housing deposits
a) Housing deposits assist with identifying, coordinating,
securing, or funding one-time services and modifications
necessary to enable a Member to establish a basic
household that do not constitute room and board, such as
first and last month’s rent as required by a landlord for
occupancy, security deposits, utility set up fees/deposits, or
service access and utility arrearages. Housing deposits are
available once per California Advancing and Innovating
Medi-Cal (CalAIM) demonstration period. Once a Member is
determined eligible for and authorized for housing deposits,
they are authorized to receive the service at any time during
a 12-month period from when authorization occurs.
b) Members must meet at least one of the following sets of
eligibility criteria (i, ii, or iii):
[[page 273]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 273 of 642
i. Members who received the housing transition
navigation services Community Support in counties
that offer housing transition navigation services;
a. While all Members who receive housing
transition navigation services are eligible for
housing deposits, Contractor must not require
that Members receive housing transition
navigation services to be eligible for housing
deposits.
ii. Members who are prioritized for a permanent
supportive housing unit or rental subsidy resource
through the local homeless coordinated entry system
or similar system designed to use information to
identify highly vulnerable individuals who meet at
least one of the following sets of criteria (a, b, c, d, or
e):
a. Have disabilities;
b. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
c. Have a SMI;
d. Are at risk of institutionalization or requiring
residential services because of a SUD;
e. Are exiting incarceration.
iii. Members who meet the HUD definition of “homeless”
as defined in 24 CFR section 91.5 (including those
exiting institutions but not including any limits on the
number of days in the institution) and meet at least
one of the following sets of criteria (a, b, c, or d):
a. Are receiving ECM;
b. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
c. Have a SMI; or
[[page 274]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 274 of 642
d. Are at risk of institutionalization or requiring
residential services as a result of a SUD.
Qualifying institutions include hospitals,
Correctional Facilities, mental health residential
treatment facilities, SUD residential treatment
facilities, recovery residences, IMDs, and state
hospitals.
c) Housing deposits may serve as an immediate alternative to
a California Medicaid State Plan covered service or setting,
or as a replacement over a longer timeframe. Housing
deposits may potentially substitute the following California
Medicaid State Plan covered services or settings:
emergency department services, emergency transport
services, inpatient services, outpatient hospital services,
outpatient mental health, rehabilitation center outpatient
services, SNF services, and transitional inpatient care
services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for housing
deposit services rendered using the standard HCPCS
code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by the State, located
at https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
3) Housing tenancy and sustaining services
a) Housing tenancy and sustaining services provide support to
Members in maintaining a safe and stable tenancy once
housing is secured. Support may include education on
tenant and landlord rights and responsibilities, reducing the
risk of eviction, coordinating updates to housing support and
crisis plans, and assistance with lease compliance. Services
are available for a single duration in the Member’s lifetime.
b) Members must meet at least one of the following sets of
eligibility criteria (i, ii, iii, or iv):
i. Any Member who received the housing transition
navigation services Community Support in counties
that offer housing transition navigation services;
[[page 275]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 275 of 642
a. While all Members who receive housing
transition navigation services are eligible for
housing tenancy and sustaining services,
Contractor must not require that Members
receive housing transition navigation services to
be eligible for housing tenancy and sustaining
services.
ii. Members who are prioritized for a permanent
supportive housing unit or rental subsidy resource
through the local homeless coordinated entry system
or similar system designed to use information to
identify highly vulnerable individuals who meet at least
one of the following sets of criteria (a, b, c, d, or, e):
a. Have disabilities;
b. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
c. Have a SMI;
d. Are at risk of institutionalization or requiring
residential services because of a SUD; or
e. Are exiting incarceration.
iii. Members who meet the HUD definition of “homeless”
as defined in of 24 CFR section 91.5 (including those
exiting institutions but not including any limits on the
number of days in the institution) and meet at least
one of the following sets of criteria (a, b, c, or d):
a. Are receiving ECM;
b. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
c. Have a SMI; or
d. Are at risk of institutionalization or requiring
residential services as a result of a SUD.
Qualifying institutions include hospitals,
Correctional Facilities, mental health
residential treatment facilities, SUD residential
treatment facilities, recovery residences, IMDs,
and state hospitals.
[[page 276]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 276 of 642
iv. Members who meet the HUD definition of “at risk of
homelessness” as defined in 24 CFR section 91.5,
have significant barriers to housing stability, and meet
at least one of the following sets of criteria (a, b, c, d,
e, or f):
a. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
b. Have a SMI;
c. Are at risk of institutionalization or overdose or
are requiring residential services because of a
SUD;
d. Have a SED (Children and adolescents);
e. Are receiving ECM; or
f. Are a transition-age Youth (aged 16 to 24
years) with significant barriers to housing
stability, such as one or more convictions, a
history of foster care, involvement with the
juvenile justice or criminal justice system,
having a SMI, having a SED, or having been a
victim of trafficking or domestic violence.
c) Housing tenancy and sustaining services may serve as an
immediate alternative to a California Medicaid State Plan
covered service or setting, or as a replacement over a longer
timeframe. Housing tenancy and sustaining services may
potentially substitute the following California Medicaid State
Plan covered services or settings: emergency department
visit, emergency transport services, inpatient services,
outpatient hospital services, outpatient mental health,
rehabilitation center outpatient services, and transitional
inpatient care services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the housing
tenancy and sustaining services rendered using the
standard HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by
the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
4) Short-term post-hospitalization housing
[[page 277]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 277 of 642
a) Short-term post-hospitalization housing provides Members
who do not have a residence and who have high medical or
behavioral health needs with the opportunity to continue
their medical, psychiatric, or SUD recovery immediately after
exiting an inpatient acute, psychiatric, or chemical
dependency and recovery hospital; residential SUD
treatment or recovery facility; residential mental health
treatment facility; correctional facility; nursing facility; or
recuperative care and to avoid utilization of California
Medicaid State Plan covered services or settings. Short-term
post-hospitalization services are available once in a
Member’s lifetime and are not to exceed a duration of six
months.
b) To receive short-term post-hospitalization services,
Members must have medical or behavioral health needs
such that experiencing homelessness upon discharge from
an inpatient acute, psychiatric, or chemical dependency and
recovery hospital; residential SUD treatment or recovery
facility; residential mental health treatment facility;
correctional facility; nursing facility; or recuperative care
would likely result in Emergency Department utilization,
hospitalization, or institutional admission. Members must
also meet at least one of the following sets of eligibility
criteria (i or ii):
i. Members exiting recuperative care; or
ii. Members exiting an inpatient acute, psychiatric, or
chemical dependency and recovery hospital stay;
residential SUD treatment or recovery facility;
residential mental health treatment facility;
correctional facility; or nursing facility and who meet
at least one of the following sets of criteria (a or b):
a. Members who meet the HUD definition of
“homeless” as defined in 24 CFR section 91.5
(including those exiting institutions but not
including any limits on the number of days in
the institution) and meet at least one of the
following sets of criteria (1, 2, 3, or 4). If exiting
an institution, individuals are considered
homeless if they were homeless immediately
prior to entering that institutional stay,
regardless of the length of the
[[page 278]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 278 of 642
institutionalization. The timeframe for an
individual or family who will imminently lose
housing is extended from fourteen (14) days
for individuals considered homeless to thirty
(30) days:
1. Are receiving ECM;
2. H ave one or more serious
chronic conditions; or
3. H ave a SMI; or
4. Are at risk of institutionalization
or requiring residential services
as a result of a SUD. Qualifying
institutions include hospitals,
Correctional Facilities, mental
health residential treatment
facilities, SUD residential
treatment facilities, recovery
residences, IMDs, and state
hospitals.
b. Members who meet the HUD definition of “at
risk of homelessness” as defined in 24 CFR
section 91.5, have significant barriers to
housing stability, and meet at least one of the
following sets of criteria (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6):
1. Have one or more serious
chronic conditions;
2. Have a SMI;
3. Are at risk of institutionalization
or overdose or are requiring
residential services because of a
SUD;
4. Have a SED (Children and
adolescents);
5, . Are receiving ECM; or
[[page 279]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 279 of 642
6. Are a transition-age Youth (aged
16 to 24 years) with significant
barriers to housing stability, such
as one or more convictions, a
history of foster care,
involvement with the juvenile
justice or criminal justice system,
having a SMI, having a SED,
and/or having been a victim of
trafficking or domestic violence.
c) Short-term post-hospitalization housing services may serve
as an immediate alternative to a California Medicaid State
Plan covered service or setting, or as a replacement over a
longer timeframe. Short-term post-hospitalization housing
services may potentially substitute the following California
Medicaid State Plan covered services or settings:
emergency department services, emergency transport
services, inpatient services, outpatient hospital services,
post-acute care, and SNF services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the short-term
post-hospitalization housing services rendered using the
standard HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by
the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
5) Recuperative care (medical respite)
a) Recuperative care, also referred to as medical respite care,
is short-term residential care for Members who no longer
require hospitalization, but still need to heal from an injury or
illness (including behavioral health conditions) and whose
condition would be exacerbated by an unstable living
environment. Recuperative care or medical respite care is
allowable for no more than 90 days in continuous duration.
This support does not include funding for building
modification or building rehabilitation.
b) Members must meet at least one of the following sets of
eligibility criteria (i, ii, iii, iv, or v):
i. Members who are at risk of hospitalization or are
post-hospitalization;
[[page 280]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 280 of 642
ii. Members who live alone with no formal supports;
iii. Members who face housing insecurity or have
housing that would jeopardize their health and safety
without modification;
iv. Members who meet the HUD definition of “homeless”
as defined in 24 CFR section 91.5 (including those
exiting institutions but not including any limits on the
number of days in the institution) and meet at least
one of the following sets of criteria (1, 2, 3, or 4). If
exiting an institution, individuals are considered
homeless if they were homeless immediately prior to
entering that institutional stay, regardless of the
length of the institutionalization. The timeframe for an
individual or family who will imminently lose housing
is extended from fourteen (14) days for individuals
considered homeless to thirty (30) days:
1. Are receiving ECM;
2. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
3. Have a SMI; or
4. Are at risk of institutionalization or requiring
residential services as a result of a SUD.
Qualifying institutions include hospitals,
Correctional Facilities, mental health
residential treatment facilities, SUD residential
treatment facilities, recovery residences, IMDs,
and state hospitals.
v. Members who meet the HUD definition of “at risk of
homelessness” as defined in 24 CFR section 91.5,
have significant barriers to housing stability, and meet
at least one of the following sets of criteria (1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, or 7):
1. Have one or more serious chronic conditions;
2. Have a SMI;
3. Are at risk of institutionalization or overdose or
are requiring residential services because of a
SUD;
[[page 281]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 281 of 642
4. Have a SED (Children and adolescents);
5. Are receiving ECM;
6. Are a transition-age Youth (aged 16 to 24
years) with significant barriers to housing
stability, such as one or more convictions, a
history of foster care, involvement with the
juvenile justice or criminal justice system,
having a SMI, having a SED, or having been a
victim of trafficking or domestic violence; or
7. Are able to transition out of inpatient facility
care, SNF care, or other health care facility,
and recuperative care is medically appropriate
and cost-effective.
c) Recuperative care or medical respite care may serve as an
immediate alternative to a California Medicaid State Plan
covered service or setting, or as a replacement over a longer
timeframe. Recuperative care or medical respite care may
potentially substitute the following California Medicaid State
Plan covered services or settings: emergency department
services, emergency transport services, inpatient services,
outpatient hospital services, post-acute care, and SNF
services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the
recuperative care or medical respite care rendered using the
standard HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by
the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
6) Respite services
a) Respite services are provided to caregivers of Members who
require intermittent temporary supervision. The services are
provided on a short-term basis because of the absence or
need for relief of those Members who normally care for or
supervise them and are non-medical in nature. Respite
services may attend to the Member’s basic self-help needs
and other Activities of Daily Living (ADL). In the home
setting, these services, in combination with any direct care
services the Member is receiving, may not exceed 24 hours
[[page 282]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 282 of 642
per day of care. The service limit is up to 336 hours per
calendar year. The service is inclusive of all in-home and in-
facility services. Contractor can authorize exceptions to the
336 hour per calendar year limit when the caregiver
experiences an episode, including medical treatment and
hospitalization, that leaves a Member without their caregiver.
b) Members must meet at least one of the following eligibility
criteria (i, ii, iii, iv, or v):
i. Members who live in the community and are
compromised in their ADLs and are therefore
dependent upon a qualified caregiver who provides
most of their support, and who require caregiver relief
to avoid institutional placement;
ii. Children who previously were covered for respite
services under the pediatrics palliative care waiver;
iii. Foster care program beneficiaries;
iv. Members enrolled in either CCS or the Genetically
Handicapped Persons Program (GHPP); or
v. Members with Complex Care Needs, which means
the multifaceted health and social support
requirements of Members who face significant
barriers to achieving and maintaining health and
stability. This includes individuals with multiple
chronic conditions, functional impairments, behavioral
health challenges, or those requiring extensive care
coordination due to social determinants of health.
c) Respite services may serve as an immediate alternative to a
California Medicaid State Plan covered service or setting, or
as a replacement over a longer timeframe. Respite services
may potentially substitute the following California Medicaid
State Plan covered services or settings: home health
agency, home health aide, Intermediate Care Facility (ICF)
services, ICF services for the developmentally disabled, ICF
services for the developmentally disabled - habilitative,
personal care services, SNF stay, and specialized
rehabilitative services in SNFs and ICFs.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the respite
services rendered using the standard HCPCS code(s) and
[[page 283]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 283 of 642
associated modifier(s) set by the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
7) Day habilitation programs
a) Day habilitation programs are provided in a Member’s home
or an out-of-home, non-facility setting. The programs are
designed to assist the Member in acquiring, retaining, and
improving self-help, socialization, and adaptive skills
necessary to reside successfully in the Member’s natural
environment. These services include the use of public
transportation and daily living skills (cooking, cleaning,
shopping, and money management).
b) Members must meet at least one of the following eligibility
criteria (i, ii, or iii):
i. Members who are experiencing homelessness;
ii. Members who exited homelessness and entered
housing in the last 24 months; or
iii. Members at risk of homelessness or
institutionalization whose housing stability could be
improved through participation in a day habilitation
program.
c) Day habilitation programs may serve as an immediate
alternative to a California Medicaid State Plan covered
service or setting, or as a replacement over a longer
timeframe. Day habilitation programs may potentially
substitute the following California Medicaid State Plan
covered services or settings: emergency department
services, occupational therapy, outpatient hospital services,
outpatient mental health, rehabilitation center outpatient
services, and targeted case management services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the day
habilitation program services rendered using the standard
HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by the State,
located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
[[page 284]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 284 of 642
8) Nursing facility transition / diversion to assisted living facilities
a) Nursing facility transition / diversion services assist Members
in transitioning to and living in an assisted living facility and
in avoiding institutionalization when possible. These services
may include assessing a Member’s housing needs and
presenting options, assisting in securing a facility residence,
assessing the service needs of the Member to determine if
the Member needs enhanced services onsite, and
coordinating their move. These services also include
ongoing assisted living services, such as support with ADLs
and Instrumental ADLs (IADLs) as needed, companion
services, and mediation oversight, that can be delivered up
to 24 hours through direct care staff to meet unpredictable
needs in a way that promotes maximum dignity and
independence, and to provide supervision, safety, and
security.
b) Members must meet at least one of the following eligibility
criteria (i or ii):
i. For nursing facility transition:
a. Have resided 60 or more days in a nursing
facility;
b. Are willing to live in an assisted living setting
as an alternative to a nursing facility; and
c. Are able to reside safely in an assisted living
facility with appropriate and cost- effective
supports.
ii. For nursing facility diversion:
a. Are interested in remaining in the community;
b. Are willing and able to reside safely in an
assisted living facility with appropriate and
cost-effective supports and services; and
c. Are currently receiving Medically Necessary
nursing facility level of care or meet the
minimum criteria to receive nursing facility level
of care services and in lieu of going into a
facility, is choosing to remain in the community
[[page 285]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 285 of 642
and continue to receive medically necessary
nursing facility level of care services at an
assisted living facility.
c) Nursing facility transition / diversion services may serve as
an immediate alternative to a California Medicaid State Plan
covered service or setting, or as a replacement over a longer
timeframe. Nursing facility transition / diversion services may
potentially substitute the following California Medicaid State
Plan services or settings: emergency department visit,
inpatient services, ICF services, ICF services for the
developmentally disabled, ICF services for the
developmentally disabled - habilitative, SNF stay, and
specialized rehabilitative services in SNFs and ICFs.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the nursing
facility transition / diversion services rendered using the
standard HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by
the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
9) Community transition services / nursing facility transition to a home
a) Community transition services / nursing facility transition to a
home services support Members with transitional care
coordination from a licensed facility to a living arrangement
in a private residence where the Member is directly
responsible for their own living expenses. This service also
covers set-up expenses necessary for a Member to
establish a basic household, such as security deposits and
utility set-up fees. Non-recurring set-up expenses are
payable up to a total lifetime maximum amount of
$7,500. The transitional coordination cost is excluded from
this total lifetime maximum. These services do not include
monthly rental or mortgage expenses, food, regular utility
charges, or household appliances or items that are intended
for purely diversionary or recreational purposes.
b) Members must meet all of the following sets of eligibility
criteria (i, ii, iii, and iv):
i. Are currently receiving medically necessary nursing
facility level of care services and, in lieu of remaining
in the nursing facility or medical respite setting, is
choosing to transition home and continue to receive
[[page 286]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 286 of 642
medically necessary nursing facility level of care
services;
ii. Has lived 60+ days in a nursing home and/or medical
respite setting;
iii. Are interested in moving back to the community; and
iv. Are able to reside safely in the community with
appropriate and cost-effective supports and services.
c) Community transition services / nursing facility transition to a
home services may serve as an immediate alternative to a
California Medicaid State Plan covered service or setting, or
as a replacement over a longer timeframe. Community
transition services / nursing facility transition to a home
services may potentially substitute the following California
Medicaid State Plan covered services or settings:
emergency department services, inpatient services, ICF
services, ICF services for the developmentally disabled, ICF
services for the developmentally disabled - habilitative, ICF
services for the developmentally disabled - nursing, SNF
stay, specialized rehabilitative services in SNFs and ICFs.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the community
transition services / nursing facility transition to a home
services rendered using the standard HCPCS code(s) and
associated modifier(s) set by the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
10) Personal care and homemaker services
a) Personal care and homemaker services are for Members
who need assistance with ADLs such as bathing, dressing,
toileting, ambulation, or feeding. Personal care and
homemaker services can also include assistance with
IADLs, such as meal preparation, grocery shopping, and
money management. Contractor cannot utilize these
services in lieu of referring to the In-Home Supportive
Services (IHSS) program. Contractor must refer Members to
the IHSS program when they meet referral criteria.
b) Members must meet at least one of the following sets of
eligibility criteria (i, ii, or iii):
[[page 287]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 287 of 642
i. Members at risk for hospitalization, or
institutionalization in a nursing facility;
ii. Members with functional deficits and no other
adequate support system; or
iii. Members approved for IHSS. IHSS eligibility
criteria can be found at:
http://www.cdss.ca.gov/In-Home-Supportive-
Services.
c) Personal care and homemaker services may serve as an
immediate alternative to a California Medicaid State Plan
covered service or setting, or as a replacement over a longer
timeframe. Personal care and homemaker services may
potentially substitute the following California Medicaid State
Plan covered services or settings: home health agency
services, home health aide services, inpatient services, ICF
services, ICF services for the developmentally disabled, ICF
services for the developmentally disabled - habilitative, SNF
stay, and specialized rehabilitative services in SNFs and
ICFs.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the personal
care and homemaker services rendered using the standard
HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by the State,
located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
11) Environmental accessibility adaptations
a) Environmental accessibility adaptations are physical
adaptations to a home that are necessary to ensure the
health, welfare, and safety of the Member, or enable the
Member to function with greater independence in the home,
without which the Member would require institutionalization.
These services include ramps and grab-bars to assist
Members in accessing the home and doorway widening for
Members who require a wheelchair.
b) Environmental accessibility adaptations are payable up to a
total lifetime maximum of $7,500. The only exceptions to the
$7,500 total maximum are if:
i. The Member’s place of residence changes; or
[[page 288]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 288 of 642
ii. The Member’s condition has changed so
significantly that additional modifications are
necessary to ensure the health, welfare, and
safety of the Member, or are necessary to
enable the Member to function with greater
independence in the home and avoid
institutionalization or hospitalization.
c) Members at risk for institutionalization in a nursing facility
are eligible for environmental accessibility adaptations.
d) Environmental accessibility adaptations may serve as an
immediate alternative to a California Medicaid State Plan
covered service or setting, or as a replacement over a longer
timeframe. Environmental accessibility adaptions may
potentially substitute the following California Medicaid State
Plan covered services or settings: emergency department
services, home health agency services, home health aide
services, inpatient services, ICF services, ICF services for
the developmentally disabled, ICF services for the
developmentally disabled - habilitative, personal care
services, SNF stay, and specialized rehabilitative services in
SNFs and ICFs.
e) Contractor must document the Encounter for the
environmental accessibility adaptations rendered using the
standard HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by
the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
12) Medically tailored meals / medically supportive food
a) Medically tailored meals / medically supportive foods are
nutrition interventions to improve the health outcomes of
Members. In addition to medically tailored meals, these
services may also include medically tailored groceries, food
pharmacies, or health food vouchers when paired with
nutrition education for Members. Members can receive up to
two meals per day and may be authorized for up to 12
weeks and may be reauthorized thereafter if Medically
Necessary.
b) To be eligible for medically tailored meals / medically
supportive foods, Members must have chronic or other
[[page 289]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 289 of 642
serious health conditions, such as, but not limited to,
diabetes, cardiovascular disorders, congestive heart failure,
stroke, chronic lung disorders, Human Immunodeficiency
Virus (HIV), cancer, gestational diabetes or other high risk
perinatal conditions, and chronic or disabling mental or
behavioral health disorders.
c) Medically tailored meals / medically supportive foods may
serve as an immediate alternative to a California Medicaid
State Plan covered service or setting, or as a replacement
over a longer timeframe. Medically tailored meals / medically
supportive foods may potentially substitute the following
California Medicaid State Plan covered services or settings:
emergency department services, emergency transport
services, home health agency services, home health aide
services, inpatient services, outpatient hospital services, and
personal care services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the medically
tailored meals / medically supportive food services rendered
using the standard HCPCS code(s) and associated
modifier(s) set by the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
13) Sobering centers
a) Sobering centers are alternative destinations for Members
who are found to be publicly intoxicated (due to alcohol or
other drugs) and would otherwise be transported to the
emergency department or jail. Sobering centers provide
these Members with a safe, supportive environment to
become sober and receive support such as rehydration and
food service and treatment for nausea. This service is
covered for a duration of less than 24 hours.
b) Members must meet all of the following sets of eligibility
criteria (i, ii, and iii):
i) Are age 18 or older;
ii) Are intoxicated but conscious, cooperative, able to
walk, are nonviolent, and free from any medical
distress (including life threatening withdrawal
symptoms or apparent underlying symptoms); and
[[page 290]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 290 of 642
iii) Who would otherwise be transported to the
emergency department or a jail, or who presented at
an emergency department and are appropriate to be
diverted to a sobering center.
c) Sobering centers may serve as an immediate alternative to a
California Medicaid State Plan covered service or setting, or
as a replacement over a longer timeframe. Sobering centers
may potentially substitute the following California Medicaid
State Plan covered services or settings: emergency
department services, inpatient services, and emergency
transport services.
d) Contractor must document the Encounter for the sobering
center services rendered using the standard HCPCS code(s)
and associated modifier(s) set by the State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
14) Asthma remediation
a) Asthma remediation services are physical modifications to a
home environment that are necessary to ensure the health,
welfare, and safety of Members, or enable Members to
function in the home, and without which acute asthma
episodes could result in the need for emergency services
and hospitalization. These services include minor mold
removal and remediation services, ventilation improvements,
and allergen impermeable mattresses and pillow dustcovers.
b) Asthma remediation services are payable up to a total
lifetime maximum of $7,500. The only exceptions to the
$7,500 total maximum is if the Member’s condition has
changed so significantly that additional modifications:
i) Are necessary to ensure the health, welfare, and
safety of the Member; or
ii) Are necessary to enable the Member to function with
greater independence in the home and avoid
institutionalization or hospitalization.
c) Eligible Members are those with poorly controlled asthma
(as determined by an emergency department visit or
hospitalization, two sick or urgent care visits in the past 12
months, or a score of 19 or lower on the asthma control test)
[[page 291]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 291 of 642
for whom a licensed health care provider has documented
that the service will likely avoid asthma-related
hospitalizations, emergency department visits, or other high-
cost services.
d) Asthma remediation may serve as an immediate alternative
to a California Medicaid State Plan covered service or
setting, or as a replacement over a longer timeframe.
Asthma remediation may potentially substitute the following
California Medicaid State Plan covered services or settings:
asthma-related Primary Care and specialty visits,
emergency department services, home health aide, home
health agency, inpatient stay, outpatient hospital services,
and personal care services.
e) Contractor must document the Encounter for the asthma
remediation services rendered using the standard HCPCS
code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by the State, located
at https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-
Options-for-ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
B. Contractor must list all Community Supports it offers in its Community
Supports Model of Care (MOC) template and Community Supports MOC
amendments.
C. Contractor must ensure Community Supports are provided in accordance
with APLs and DHCS’ Community Supports Policy Guide.
D. Contractor must ensure Community Supports are provided to Members in
a timely manner, and must develop policies and procedures outlining its
approach to managing Community Supports Provider shortages or other
barriers to ensure timely provision of Community Supports.
E. Contractor may discontinue offering Community Supports annually with
notice to DHCS at least 90 calendar days prior to the discontinuation date.
Contractor must ensure Community Supports that were authorized for a
Member prior to the discontinuation of those specific Community Supports
are not disrupted by a change in Community Supports offerings, either by
completing the authorized service or by seamlessly transitioning the
Member into other Medically Necessary services or programs that meet
the Member’s needs.
F. At least 30 calendar days before discontinuing one or more Community
Supports, Contractor must notify impacted Members of the following:
[[page 292]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 292 of 642
1) The change and timing of discontinuation, and
2) The procedures that will be used to ensure completion of the
authorized Community Supports or a transition into other
comparable Medically Necessary services.
G. Contractor may provide voluntary services that are neither State-approved
Community Supports nor Covered Services when medically appropriate
for the Member, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.3(e)(1). Such
voluntary services are not subject to the terms of this Section 4.5 and are
subject to the limitations of 42 CFR section 438.3(e)(1).
4.5.3 Community Supports Providers
A. Community Supports Providers are entities that Contractor has
determined can provide Community Supports to eligible Members in an
effective manner consistent with culturally and linguistically appropriate
care, as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11 (Cultural
and Linguistic Programs and Committees).
B. Contractor must enter into Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, or Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, as appropriate,
with Community Supports Providers for the delivery of Community
Supports elected by Contractor.
C. Contractor must ensure all Community Supports Providers for whom a
State-level Enrollment pathway exists enroll in Medi-Cal, pursuant to
relevant APLs, including APL 22-013. If APL 22-013 does not apply to a
Community Supports Provider, Contractor must have a process for
verifying qualifications and experience of Community Supports Providers,
which must extend to individuals employed by or delivering services on
behalf of the Community Supports Provider. Contractor must ensure that
all Community Supports Providers meet the capabilities and standards
required to be a Community Supports Provider.
D. In accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.9 (Data
System Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Community
Supports), Contractor must support Community Supports Provider access
to systems and processes allowing them to do the following, at a
minimum:
1) Obtain and document Member Information including eligibility,
Community Supports authorization status, Member authorization for
data sharing (to the extent required by law), and other relevant
demographic and administrative information; and
[[page 293]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 293 of 642
2) Support Community Supports Provider notification to Contractor,
ECM Providers, and Member’s Primary Care Provider (PCP), as
applicable, when a referral has been fulfilled, as described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.5.9 (Data System
Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Community Supports).
E. To the extent Contractor elects to offer Community Supports, Contractor
may coordinate its approach with other Medi-Cal managed care health
plans offering Community Supports in the same county.
F. Contractor must prioritize contracting with locally available community-
based organizations that have experience working with eligible
populations and delivering the outlined Community Supports services
(e.g., Supportive housing providers, Skilled Nursing Facilities (SNFs),
medically tailored meals providers).
4.5.4 Community Supports Provider Capacity
A. Contractor must develop a robust network of Community Supports
Providers to deliver all elected Community Supports.
B. If Contractor is unable to offer its elected Community Supports to all
eligible Members for whom it is medically appropriate and cost-effective
within a particular county, Contractor must submit ongoing progress
reports to DHCS in a format and manner specified by DHCS.
C. Contractor must ensure all of its Community Supports Providers have
sufficient capacity to receive referrals for Community Supports and
provide the agreed-upon volume of Community Supports to Members who
are authorized for such services on an ongoing basis.
4.5.5 Community Supports Model of Care
A. Contractor must develop a Community Supports MOC in accordance with
the DHCS-approved Community Supports MOC template. The Community
Supports MOC must specify Contractor’s framework for providing
Community Supports, including a listing of its Community Supports
Providers and policies and procedures for partnering with Community
Supports Providers for the provision of Community Supports.
B. In developing and executing Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, or Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, as appropriate,
with Community Supports Providers, Contractor must incorporate all
requirements and policies and procedures described in its Community
Supports MOC, in addition to APLs.
[[page 294]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 294 of 642
C. Contractor may collaborate with other Medi-Cal managed care health
plans within the same county on the development of its Community
Supports MOC.
D. Contractor must submit its Community Supports MOC for DHCS review
and approval. Contractor must also submit to DHCS any significant
changes to its Community Supports MOC for DHCS review and approval
at least 60 calendar days in advance of any such occurrence of changes
or updates, in accordance with DHCS policies and guidance, including
APLs. Significant changes may include, but are not limited to, changes to
Contractor’s approach to administer or deliver Community Supports
services; approved policies and procedures; and Network Provider
Agreement, Subcontractor Agreement, or Downstream Subcontractor
Agreement boilerplates, as appropriate.
4.5.6 Identifying Members for Community Supports
A. Contractor must utilize a variety of methods to identify Members who may
benefit from Community Supports, in accordance with all applicable DHCS
APLs.
B. Contractor must develop policies and procedures for Community
Supports, and submit its policies and procedures to DHCS for review and
approval prior to implementation. Contractor’s policies and procedures
must address the following, at a minimum:
1) How Contractor will identify Members eligible for Community
Supports;
2) How Contractor will notify Members; and
3) How Contractor will receive requests to evaluate Members for
Community Supports from Providers; community-based entities;
and Member or Member’s family, legal guardians, Authorized
Representatives (ARs), and caregivers.
C. Contractor must submit all Member notices to DHCS for review and
approval prior to implementation.
D. Contractor must ensure that Member identification methods for
Community Supports are equitable and do not exacerbate or contribute to
existing racial and ethnic disparities.
4.5.7 Authorizing Members for Community Supports and Communication of
Authorization Status
[[page 295]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 295 of 642
A. Contractor must develop and maintain policies and procedures that
explain how Contractor will authorize Community Supports for eligible
Members in an equitable and non-discriminatory manner. Contractor must
submit its policies and procedures to DHCS for review and approval prior
to implementation.
1) Contractor’s policies and procedures must include a framework for
considering medical appropriateness in relation to Contractor’s
proposed approach for providing Community Supports.
2) Each Community Support authorization request must be
considered separately for a Member. Contractor must evaluate
each authorization request for medical appropriateness. Receiving
one Community Support does not preclude a Member from being
authorized for additional Community Supports unless a conflict is
specified by DHCS.
B. Contractor must monitor and evaluate Community Supports authorizations
to ensure they are equitable and non-discriminatory. Contractor must have
policies and procedures in place for immediate actions that it will
undertake if monitoring/evaluation processes reveal that service
authorizations have had an inequitable effect.
C. Contractor’s policies and procedures must include detailed documentation
that a Network Provider, or Contractor’s staff Provider using their
professional judgement has determined it to be medically appropriate for
the Member to receive Community Supports as it is likely to reduce or
prevent the need for acute care or other California Medicaid State Plan
services in accordance with APLs and to be defined in forthcoming
guidance.
D. Contractor must develop and maintain policies and procedures to ensure
Members do not experience undue delays pending the authorization
process for Community Supports. If Medically Necessary, Contractor must
make available the California Medicaid State Plan services that the
Community Supports replace, pending authorization of the requested
Community Supports.
E. Contractor must have policies and procedures for expediting the
authorization of certain Community Supports for urgent needs, as
appropriate, and that identify the circumstances in which any expedited
authorization processes apply, in accordance with APLs.
F. When a Member has requested Community Supports, directly or through
a Provider, community-based organization, or other entity, Contractor
must notify the requestor and the Member of Contractor’s decision
[[page 296]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 296 of 642
regarding Community Supports authorization, in accordance with APLs. If
the Member is enrolled in ECM, Contractor must ensure the ECM Provider
is informed of the Community Supports authorization decision.
G. Members always retain the right to file Appeals and/or Grievances if they
request one or more Community Supports offered by Contractor but were
not authorized to receive the requested Community Supports.
H. For Members who sought Community Supports offered by Contractor, but
were not authorized to receive the Community Supports, Contractor must
submit necessary data to monitor Appeals and Grievances as well as
follow its standard Grievances and Appeals process outlined in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal System) and
APL 21-011.
4.5.8 Referring Members to Community Supports Providers for Community
Supports
A. Contractor must develop and maintain policies and procedures to define
how Community Supports Provider referrals will occur. Contractor must
submit to DHCS policies and procedures for review and approval prior to
implementation.
1) For Members enrolled in ECM, Contractor’s policies and
procedures must address how Contractor will work with the ECM
Provider to coordinate the Community Supports referral and
communicate the outcome of the referral back to the ECM Provider.
2) Contractor’s policies and procedures must include expectations and
procedures to ensure referrals occur in a timely manner after
service authorization.
B. If the Member prefers a particular Community Supports Provider and
Contractor is aware of this preference, Contractor must follow those
preferences, to the extent practicable.
C. Contractor must track referrals to Community Supports Providers to verify
if the authorized service has been delivered to the Member.
If the Member receiving Community Supports is also receiving ECM,
Contractor must monitor to ensure that the ECM Provider tracks whether
the Member receives the authorized service from the Community Supports
Provider.
D. Contractor must not require Member authorization for Community
Supports-related data sharing as a condition of initiating delivery of
[[page 297]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 297 of 642
Community Supports, unless such authorization is required by State or
federal law.
E. Contractor must develop and maintain policies and procedures for its
network of Community Supports Providers to:
1) Ensure the Member agrees to receive Community Supports;
2) Where required by applicable law, ensure that Members authorize
information sharing with Contractor and all others involved in the
Member’s care as needed to support the Member and maximize
the benefits of Community Supports, in accordance with APLs,
laws, and regulations;
3) Provide Contractor with Member-level records of any obtained
authorization for Community Supports-related data sharing which
are required by law, and to facilitate ongoing data sharing with
Contractor; and
4) Obtain Member authorization to communicate electronically with
the Member, Member’s family, legal guardians, ARs, caregivers,
and other authorized support persons, if Contractor intends to do
so.
4.5.9 Data System Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Community
Supports
A. Contractor must use systems and processes capable of tracking
Community Supports referrals, access to Community Supports, and
Grievances and Appeals.
Contractor must support Community Supports Provider access to systems
and processes allowing them to track and manage referrals for
Community Supports and Member information.
B. Consistent with federal, State and, if applicable, local privacy and
confidentiality laws, Contractor must ensure Community Supports
Providers have access to the below as part of the referral process to
Community Supports Providers:
1) Demographic and administrative information confirming the referred
Member’s eligibility and authorization for the requested service;
2) Appropriate administrative, clinical, and social service information
that Community Supports Providers might need to effectively
provide the requested service; and
[[page 298]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 298 of 642
3) Billing information necessary to support the Community Supports
Providers’ ability to submit claims or invoices to Contractor.
C. Contractor must use defined federal and State standards, specifications,
code sets, and terminologies when sharing physical, behavioral, social,
and administrative data with Community Supports Providers and with
DHCS in compliance with data exchange policies and procedures, as
defined by the California Health and Human Services Data Exchange
Framework in accordance with H&S section 130290, when sharing
physical, behavioral, social, and administrative data with Community
Supports Providers and with DHCS.
4.5.10 Contractor’s Oversight of Community Supports Providers
A. Contractor must comply with all State and federal reporting requirements.
B. Contractor must perform oversight of Community Supports Providers,
holding them accountable for all Community Supports requirements
contained in this Contract and all applicable APLs.
C. Contractor must use all applicable APLs to develop its Network Provider
Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements, as appropriate, with Community Supports Providers and
must incorporate all of its Community Supports Provider requirements.
Contractor must submit its Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, as appropriate,
with Community Supports Providers to DHCS for review and approval in a
form and manner specified by DHCS.
D. To streamline Community Supports implementation:
1) Contractor must hold Community Supports Providers responsible
for the same reporting requirements as are required of Contractor
by DHCS;
2) Contractor must not impose mandatory reporting requirements that
are alternative or additional to those required for Encounter Data
and supplemental reporting as described in Subsection 4.5.13
(Community Supports Reporting Requirements); and
3) Contractor may collaborate with other Medi-Cal managed care
health plans within the same county on reporting requirements and
oversight.
[[page 299]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 299 of 642
E. Contractor must not utilize tools developed or promulgated by NCQA to
perform oversight of Community Supports Providers, unless by mutual
consent with the Community Supports Provider.
F. Contractor must provide Community Supports training and technical
assistance to Community Supports Providers, including in-person
sessions, webinars, and calls, as necessary, in addition to Network
Provider training requirements, as applicable, as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 3.2.5 (Network Provider Training).
G. Contractor must not require Community Supports Providers to use a
contractor-specific portal for day-to-day documentation of services.
However, this prohibition does not preclude providers and Contractor from
mutually agreeing to use of portals to facilitate reporting and other
administrative transactions.
4.5.11 Delegation of Community Supports Administration to Network Providers,
Subcontractors, or Downstream Subcontractors
A. Contractor may enter into Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, or Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, as appropriate,
with other entities to administer Community Supports in accordance with
the following:
1) Contractor must maintain and be responsible for oversight of
compliance with all Contract provisions and Covered Services, as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 3.1 (Network
Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements, and Contractor’s Oversight Duties);
2) Contractor must develop and maintain DHCS-approved policies
and procedures to ensure Network Providers, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors meet required responsibilities and
functions as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.4
(Contractor’s Duty to Ensure Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, and Network Provider Compliance);
3) Contractor must evaluate the prospective Network Provider’s,
Subcontractor’s, or Downstream Subcontractor’s ability to perform
services as described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.4
(Contractor’s Duty to Ensure Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, and Network Provider Compliance);
4) Contractor must ensure the Network Provider’s, Subcontractor’s, or
Downstream Subcontractor’s Community Supports Provider
capacity is sufficient to serve all Populations of Focus;
[[page 300]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 300 of 642
5) Contractor must, as applicable, report to DHCS the names of all
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors by Subcontractor
and Downstream Subcontractor type and service(s) provided, and
identify the county or counties in which Members are served as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.3
(Contractor’s Duty to Disclose All Delegated Relationships and to
Submit Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan); and
6) Contractor must make all Network Provider Agreements,
Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements available to DHCS upon request. Such agreements
must contain minimum required information specified by DHCS,
including method and amount of compensation as described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.5. (Requirements for
Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements).
B. Contractor must ensure all Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements mirror the
requirements set forth in this Contract and APLs, as applicable to the
Network Provider, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor.
C. Contractor may collaborate with its Network Providers, Subcontractors,
and Downstream Subcontractors on its approach to Community Supports
to minimize divergence in how the Community Supports will be
implemented between Contractor and its Network Providers,
Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors, and to ensure a
streamlined, seamless experience for Community Supports Providers and
Members.
4.5.12 Payment of Community Supports Providers
A. Contractor must pay contracted Community Supports Providers for the
provision of authorized Community Supports to Members in accordance
with established Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, or Downstream Subcontractor Agreements between
Contractor and each Community Supports Provider.
B. Contractor must utilize the claims timeline and process as described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.5 (Claims Processing) to ensure
timely payment of claims, bills, or invoices.
C. Contractor must identify any circumstances under which payment for
Community Supports must be expedited to facilitate timely delivery of the
[[page 301]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 301 of 642
Community Supports to the Member, such as recuperative care for a
Member who is homeless and being discharged from the hospital.
For such circumstances, Contractor must develop and maintain policies
and procedures to ensure payment to the Community Supports Provider is
expedited. Contractor must submit these policies and procedures to
DHCS for review and approval prior to implementation.
D. Contractor must ensure Community Supports Providers submit a claim for
rendered Community Supports, to the greatest extent possible.
1) If a Community Supports Provider is unable to submit a claim for
Community Supports rendered, Contractor must ensure the
Community Supports Provider apply the DHCS approved billing
and guidance to submit invoices, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/ECM-and-
Community-Supports-Billing-and-Invoicing-Guidance.pdf.
2) Upon receipt of such an invoice, Contractor must document the
Encounter for the Community Supports rendered using the
standard HCPCS code(s) and associated modifier(s) set by the
State, located at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov/Documents/MCQMD/Coding-Options-for-
ECM-and-Community-Supports.pdf.
4.5.13 Community Supports Reporting Requirements
A. In the Community Supports MOC, Contractor must include details on the
Community Supports Contractor plans to offer, including which counties
Community Supports will be offered and its network of Community
Supports Providers.
B. After implementation of Community Supports, Contractor must submit the
following data and reports to DHCS to support DHCS oversight of
Community Supports:
1) Encounter Data
a) Contractor must submit all Community Supports Encounter
Data to DHCS using national standard specifications and
code sets to be defined by DHCS. Contractor must comply
with DHCS guidance on billing and invoicing standards for
Contractor to use with Community Supports Providers.
b) Contractor must submit to DHCS all Community Supports
Encounter Data, including Encounter Data for Community
[[page 302]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 302 of 642
Supports generated under Network Provider Agreements,
Subcontractor Agreements, or Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements.
c) In the event the Community Supports Provider is unable to
submit Community Supports Encounter Data to Contractor
using the national standard specifications and code sets to
be defined by DHCS, Contractor must convert Community
Supports Providers’ invoicing and billing data into the
national standard specifications and code sets, for
submission to DHCS.
d) Encounter Data, when possible, must include data
necessary for DHCS to stratify services by age, sex, race,
ethnicity, and language spoken to inform Health Equity
initiatives and efforts to mitigate Health Disparities
undertaken by DHCS.
2) Supplemental reporting on a schedule and in a form to be defined
by DHCS.
C. Contractor must timely submit any related data requested by DHCS,
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), or an independent
entity conducting an evaluation of Community Supports including, but not
limited to:
1) Data to evaluate the utilization and effectiveness of Community
Supports.
2) Data necessary to monitor health outcomes and quality metrics at
the local and aggregate levels through timely and accurate
Encounter Data and supplemental reporting on health outcomes
and equity of care. When possible, metrics must be stratified by
age, sex, race, ethnicity, and language spoken.
3) Data necessary to monitor Member Appeals and Grievances
associated with Community Supports.
D. In the event of underperformance by Contractor in relation to its
administration of Community Supports, DHCS may impose sanctions in
accordance with Exhibit E, Section 1.19 (Sanctions).
4.5.14 Community Supports Quality and Performance Incentive Program
A. Contractor must meet all quality management and Quality Improvement
requirements described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.2 (Quality
[[page 303]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 303 of 642
Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program (QIHETP)), and
any additional quality requirements for Community Supports set forth in
associated guidance from DHCS.
B. Contractor may participate in a performance incentive program related to
adoption of Community Supports, building infrastructure and Provider
capacity for Community Supports, related health care quality and
outcomes, and other performance milestones and measures, in
accordance with APL 23-003 or other technical guidance.
[[page 304]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 304 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
4.6 Member Grievance and Appeal System
4.6.1 Grievance and Appeal Program Requirements
4.6.2 Grievance Process
4.6.3 Discrimination Grievances
4.6.4 Notice of Action
4.6.5 Appeal Process
4.6.6 Responsibilities in Expedited Appeals
4.6.7 State Hearings and Independent Medical Reviews
4.6.8 Continuation of Services Until Appeal and State Hearing Rights Are
Exhausted
4.6.9 Grievance and Appeal Reporting and Data
[[page 305]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 305 of 642
4.6 Member Grievance and Appeal System
4.6.1 Grievance and Appeal Program Requirements
Contractor must have in place a Member Grievance and Appeal system that
complies with 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) sections 438.228 and
438.400 - 424, 28 California Code of Regulations (CCR) sections 1300.68 and
1300.68.01, and 22 CCR section 53858 for Covered Services including
Contractor’s selected Community Supports under 42 CFR section 438.3(e)(2).
Contractor must follow Grievance and Appeal requirements set forth in, and use
all notice templates included in, All Plan Letter (APL) 21-011. Contractor must
ensure that its Grievance and Appeal system meets the following requirements:
A. Allows the Member, or a Provider or Authorized Representative (AR) with
the Member’s written consent, to file a Grievance, or request an Appeal
with Contractor either orally or in writing.
B. Ensures timely written acknowledgement of each Grievance or Appeal,
and provides a notice of resolution to the Member as quickly as the
Member’s health condition requires, not to exceed 30 calendar days from
the date the Member makes an oral or written request to Contractor for a
standard Grievance or Appeal or 72 hours for an expedited Grievance or
Appeal. Contractor must notify the Member, Provider, or AR with a written
resolution of the Grievance or Appeal in the Member’s preferred language
as required by 42 CFR sections 438.10 and 438.404, W&I section
14029.91, and 22 CCR section 53876.
C. Ensures that Members are given assistance when completing Grievance
and Appeal forms and all other procedural steps. Required assistance
includes, but is not limited to, providing Members with all documents
Contractor relied on for its decision, and providing Auxiliary Aid and
services upon request, such as translation and interpreter services, use of
alternative formats for all documents Contractor relied upon for its
decision, and a toll-free number with TTY/TDD and interpreter capability.
D. Ensures that the person making the final decision for the proposed
resolution of a Grievance or Appeal has neither participated in any prior
decisions related to the Grievance or Appeal, nor is a subordinate of
someone who has participated in the prior decision. Contractor must
ensure that all Grievance or Appeals related to medical Quality of Care
issues be immediately submitted to Contractor’s medical director for
action. Contractor must ensure that the person making the decision on the
Grievance or Appeal has clinical expertise in treating a Member’s
condition or disease when deciding:
[[page 306]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 306 of 642
1) An Appeal of a denial based on lack of Medical Necessity or that
the service is experimental or investigational;
2) A Grievance regarding denial of a request for expedited resolution
of an Appeal; and
3) Any Grievance or Appeal involving clinical issues.
E. Considers all comments, documents, records, and other information
submitted by the Member, Provider, or AR, regardless of whether
Contractor had the Member’s additional information during the initial
review.
F. Ensures that Members are given a reasonable opportunity to present
evidence and testimony, and make legal or factual arguments, in person,
by telephone, or in writing, in support of their Grievance or Appeal.
Contactor must inform Members that they must submit additional evidence
for Contractor to consider within the 30-calendar-day review timeframe for
an Appeal and within the 72-hour timeframe for resolving an expedited
Appeal.
G. Ensures that Notices of Appeal Resolution (NAR) be in a format and a
language that, at a minimum, meets the standards set forth in 42 CFR
section 438.10, W&I section 14029.91, 22 CCR section 53876, and Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.3 (Member Information). Contractor must
ensure that language assistance taglines and a nondiscrimination notice
meeting the minimum requirements in APL 21-004 accompanies each
Member notification, and that the nondiscrimination notice is made
available, upon request or as otherwise required by law, in all of the
Threshold Languages/Threshold or Concentration Standard Languages
and Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA)-compliant, accessible
formats as needed by Members to effectively understand Contractor’s
notices.
H. Provides oral notice of the resolution of an expedited Appeal to the
Member, Provider, or AR within 72 hours.
I. Provides Contractor’s Grievance and Appeal policies and procedures to
Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors at
the time that they enter into a Network Provider Agreement, Subcontractor
Agreement, or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement. Contractor must
ensure that Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors are trained on and immediately notified of any changes to
Contractor’s Grievance and Appeal policies and procedures.
[[page 307]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 307 of 642
J. Maintains policies and procedures for compiling, aggregating, and
reviewing Grievance and Appeal data for use in Contractor’s Quality
Improvement Strategy (QIS). Contractor must regularly analyze Grievance
and Appeal data to identify, investigate, report, and act upon systemic
patterns of improper service denials and other trends impacting health
care access and delivery to Members. Contractor must impose necessary
Corrective Action to remedy all identified deficiencies.
K. Maintains records of Grievances and Appeals in a manner accessible to
DHCS and to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), upon
request. Contractor must review Grievance and Appeal data and
information as part of its ongoing monitoring procedures as well as for
updates and revisions to its QIS. The record of each Grievance or Appeal
must contain, at a minimum, all information set forth in 42 CFR section
438.416(b). Contractor must ensure that all documents and records,
whether in written or electronic format, generated or obtained by
Contractor in the course of responding to Adverse Benefit Determinations
(ABD), Grievances, Appeals, and Independent Medical Reviews (IMRs)
are retained for at least 10 years pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.3(u).
4.6.2 Grievance Process
Contractor’s policies and procedures must include all required information set
forth below for Grievances and the expedited review of Grievances as required
under 42 CFR sections 438.402, 438.406, and 438.408; 28 CCR sections
1300.68 and 1300.68.01; and 22 CCR section 53858:
A. A policy and procedure for Members to file a Grievance with Contractor at
any time to express dissatisfaction about any matter other than a notice of
ABD.
B. A policy and procedure to allow Members to file a Grievance to contest
Contractor’s unilateral decision to extend the timeframe for resolution of
an Appeal or expedited Appeal.
C. A policy and procedure to ensure that every Grievance involving clinical
issues that is submitted is reported to qualified medical professionals with
appropriate clinical expertise and is escalated to Contractor’s medical
director as needed, to ensure the Grievance is properly handled.
D. A policy and procedure to ensure that Contractor’s staff monitor
Grievances to identify issues that require Corrective Action. Grievances
related to medical Quality of Care issues must be referred to qualified
medical professionals with appropriate clinical expertise and be escalated
to Contractor’s medical director as needed.
[[page 308]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 308 of 642
E. A policy and procedure for Contractor to provide written acknowledgement
to the Member within five calendar days of receipt of the Grievance. The
acknowledgement letter must advise the Member that the Grievance has
been received; provide the date of receipt; and provide the name,
telephone number, and address of the representative who the Member,
their Provider, or their AR may contact about the Grievance.
4.6.3 Discrimination Grievances
Contractor must process Discrimination Grievances as required by federal and
State nondiscrimination law and DHCS policy, as stated in 45 CFR section 84.7,
34 CFR section 106.8, 28 CFR section 35.107, W&I section 14029.91(e)(4), and
APL 21-004.
A. Contractor must designate a Discrimination Grievance coordinator
responsible for ensuring compliance with federal and State
nondiscrimination requirements and investigating Discrimination
Grievances related to any action that would be prohibited by, or out of
compliance with, federal or State nondiscrimination law.
B. Contractor must adopt and implement written policies and procedures to
ensure the prompt and equitable resolution of Discrimination Grievances.
Contractor must not require a Member or Potential Member to file a
Discrimination Grievance with Contractor before filing with the DHCS
Office of Civil Rights or the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services Office for Civil Rights.
C. Within ten calendar days of mailing a Discrimination Grievance resolution
letter, Contractor must submit information regarding the Discrimination
Grievance to the DHCS Office of Civil Rights, as specified in APL 21-004
to DHCS.DiscriminationGrievances@dhcs.ca.gov.
D. Contractor must inform Members on its website that Discrimination
Grievances may be filed directly with the DHCS Office of Civil Rights and
must include contact information for the DHCS Office of Civil Rights, as
required by Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.3 (Member
Information).
4.6.4 Notice of Action
When Contractor makes an authorization decision, it must send a Notice of
Action (NOA). A NOA is a notice of any action that impacts a Member’s ability to
obtain Covered Services or other benefits Contractor is required to provide under
this Contract. A NOA includes, but is not limited to, a notice of ABD for a
requested health care service under 42 CFR sections 438.210(d) and 438.404,
[[page 309]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 309 of 642
including requested Community Supports that Contractor has elected to cover
under 42 CFR section 438.3(e)(2).
Contractor’s failure to render a decision and send a written NOA to the Member
within the required timeframes below is considered a denial of the requested
service and therefore constitutes an ABD on the date that Contractor’s timeframe
for approval expires, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.404(c)(5). In cases
where Contractor fails to meet the required notice timeframes, the Member may
immediately request an Appeal with Contractor and Contractor must send the
Member written notice of all Appeal rights.
A. Standard Authorization Requests
1) Contractor must ensure a NOA is sent when approving, denying or
modifying a Provider’s Prior Authorization or concurrent request for
health care services (excluding pharmacy services, but including
Community Supports) for a Member within the shortest applicable
timeframe that is appropriate for the nature of the Member’s
condition, but no longer than five Working Days from Contractor’s
receipt of information reasonably necessary and requested by
Contractor to make a determination, not to exceed 14 calendar
days following Contractor’s receipt of the request for service, in
accordance with 42 CFR sections 438.210(d)(1) and 438.404(c)(3);
and
2) Contractor must notify the requesting Provider of its authorization
decision within 24 hours of the decision and send the written NOA
to the Member within two Working Days in accordance with H&S
section 1367.01(h)(1) and (3).
3) Contractor must send the written NOA approving, denying, or
modifying the authorization request. Contractor must approve,
deny, or modify the request and send the written NOA within the
shortest applicable timeframe that is appropriate for the nature of
the Member’s condition, but no longer than five Working Days from
Contractor’s receipt of information reasonably necessary and
requested by Contractor to make a determination, not to exceed 14
calendar days in accordance with 42 CFR sections 438.210(d)(1)
and 438.404(c)(3); and
4) Contractor must send the written NOA to the Member with sufficient
time to allow for continuation of benefits pursuant to 42 CFR
section 438.420.
B. Expedited Authorization Requests
[[page 310]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 310 of 642
1) In instances where a Provider indicates, or Contractor determines,
that the standard request timeframe may seriously jeopardize the
Member’s life; health; or ability to attain, maintain, or regain
maximum function, Contractor must approve, modify, or deny a
Prior Authorization or concurrent request for health care services,
and send the written NOA, in a timeframe which is appropriate for
the nature of the Member’s condition, but no longer than 72 hours
from receipt of the authorization request in accordance with 42 CFR
section 438.210(d)(2) and (d)(2)(i).
2) Contractor must send the written NOA approving, denying, or
modifying the authorization request. Contractor must send the
written NOA to the Member with sufficient time to allow for
continuation of benefits pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.420.
3) Contractor must approve, modify, or deny the request within the
shortest applicable timeframe that is appropriate for the nature of
the Member’s condition, but no longer than 72 hours from
Contractor’s receipt of additional information requested by
Contractor to make a determination. Contractor’s written notice to
the Member must be sent with sufficient time to allow the Member
to request Aid Paid Pending if applicable.
C. Retrospective Review
Contractor must approve, modify, or deny a Provider’s request for
Retrospective Review authorization for health care services provided to a
Member, and send the written NOA to the Member, within 30 calendar
days from receipt of information that is reasonably necessary to make a
determination.
D. Terminations, Suspensions, or Reductions
1) For terminations, suspensions, or reductions of previously
authorized services, Contractor must notify Members at least ten
calendar days before the date of the action pursuant to 42 CFR
section 431.211, with the exception of circumstances permitted
under 42 CFR sections 431.213 and 431.214.
2) For purposes of auditing, the postmark on Contractor’s notice to the
Member will be used to confirm compliance with all authorization
request timeframes and notice requirements set forth in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal
System).
[[page 311]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 311 of 642
E. Required Information in Contractor’s NOA Informing Member of Notice of
ABDs.
Contractor must ensure all NOAs informing a Member of an ABD are in
writing in a format and language that, at a minimum, meets the standards
set forth 42 CFR sections 438.10, 438.404, and 438.408; W&I section
14029.91; 22 CCR section 53876; and Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.1.3 (Member Information), and APL 21-004, Standards for
Determining Threshold Languages, Nondiscrimination Requirements, and
Language Assistance Services. Contractor’s NOA informing of an ABD
must include all of the following:
1) A clear and concise explanation of the action that Contractor or its
Network Provider has taken or intends to take, including a fully
translated written notice with a fully translated clinical rationale for
Contractor’s decision at the point of each determination;
2) The reason for the action, including notification to the Member of
the right to be provided, upon request and free of charge,
reasonable access to, and copies of, all documents, records, and
any other information Contractor relied on for the decision,
including clinical criteria; Medical Necessity criteria; and any
processes, strategies, or evidentiary standards relied on for the
decision;
3) The Member’s right to request an Appeal with Contractor no later
than 60 calendar days from the date on the NOA, and information
on exhausting Contractor’s one-level Appeal system;
4) The Member’s right to an expedited Appeal if the Member’s health
condition requires resolution in less than 72 hours and information
on how to request an expedited Appeal;
5) The Member’s rights and information on the process to request a
State Hearing after having exhausted Contractor’s internal Appeal
process and having received notice that Contractor is upholding its
action. The NOA must also advise that the Member may request a
State Hearing in cases where Contractor fails to send a NAR or
notice of extension in response to the Appeal within 30 calendar
days of the Member’s request for an Appeal. This is known as
Deemed Exhaustion pursuant to 42 CFR section
438.402(c)(1)(i)(A);
6) The Member’s right to continue receiving Covered Services
pending the resolution of the Appeal, and Contractor’s obligation to
continue benefits as required by 42 CFR section 438.420 and
[[page 312]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 312 of 642
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.6.8 (Continuation of
Services Until Appeal and State Hearing Rights Are Exhausted)
below; and
7) If applicable, the Member’s right to request a clinical review of
Contractor’s action, called an IMR, from DMHC and that the
Member must request an IMR before there is a final decision on
their State Hearing.
F. For visually impaired Members, Contractor must provide the NOA in the
Member’s selected alternative format in order to be considered adequate
notice. Contractor must not deny, delay, modify, limit, or terminate
services or treatments without providing adequate notice within the
timeframes stated in this Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.6.4
(Notice of Action). In accordance with APL 22-002, Contractor must
calculate the appropriate timeframe(s) for a visually impaired Member to
take action from the date of receiving adequate notice in their selected
alternative format, including all deadlines for Appeals.
G. Contractors are not permitted to make any changes to DHCS’ NOA
templates or the NOA “Your Rights” Attachment without prior review and
approval from DHCS, except to insert the specific reasons for Contractor’s
action to the Member, as required.
4.6.5 Appeal Process
Pursuant to 42 CFR sections 438.228 and 438.400 - 424, Contractor must have
an Appeal process as required below to attempt to resolve Member Appeals
before the Member requests a State Hearing or an IMR. Contractor must have
only one level of Appeal for Members. Upon a Member’s request, Contractor
must assist any Member in preparing their Appeal, which includes assisting the
Member with navigating Contractor’s website, providing all documents that
Contractor relied on for its decision, and providing the Appeal form to the
Member.
A. Following the receipt of a NOA, a Member has 60 calendar days from the
date on the NOA to file a request for an Appeal either orally or in writing.
The Member, or a Provider or AR acting on behalf of the Member and with
the Member’s written consent, may request an Appeal. Unless the
Member is requesting an expedited Appeal, the date of the Member’s oral
or written request for an Appeal establishes the filing date for the Appeal.
Contractor must resolve the Appeal within 30 calendar days of the
Member’s oral or written request for an Appeal.
B. If Contractor fails to send a written NOA within 30 calendar days or fails to
comply with notice and language translation requirements in 42 CFR
[[page 313]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 313 of 642
sections 438.10, 438.404, and 438.408; W&I section 14029.91; 22 CCR
section 53876; and Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.3 (Member
Information), the Member is deemed to have exhausted Contractor’s
internal Appeal process and may request a State Hearing pursuant to 42
CFR section 438.402(c)(1)(i)(A).
C. Contractor’s NOA informing the Member of its NAR must, at a minimum,
indicate whether Contractor upheld its decision on the Appeal and the
date of Contractor’s decision on the Appeal. For decisions not wholly in
the Member’s favor, Contractor’s NAR must, at a minimum, include:
1) Member’s right to request a State Hearing;
2) How to request a State Hearing;
3) That the Member has a right to continuation of benefits during the
State Hearing, and that Contractor is obligated to continue benefits
as long as the requirements of 42 CFR section 438.420 are met;
4) If applicable, the right to request an IMR or a review of Contractor’s
decision by DMHC, and that the IMR must be requested before
there is a final State Hearing decision; and
5) The DHCS-approved “Your Rights” Attachment.
D. If Contractor reverses its decision during the Appeal, it must authorize or
provide the disputed services promptly, and as expeditiously as the
Member’s health condition requires, but no later than 72 hours from the
date it reverses the action if the disputed services were not provided
during the Appeal.
E. Contractor must pay for disputed services if the Member received the
disputed services while the Appeal was pending.
F. Contractor must provide the Member or AR the opportunity before and
during their Appeal process to examine their case file. Contractor must
provide, sufficiently in advance of the resolution timeframe and free of
charge, the Member’s case file, including Medical Records, clinical criteria,
guidelines, and all documents and records Contractor relied on during the
Appeal process for its decision. Contractor must assist any Member who
requires assistance preparing their Appeal.
G. Contractor may withdraw a Grievance or Appeal upon Member request if
performed in compliance with the established Grievance and Appeals
processes required in this Contract and federal and State laws and
regulations. Where a Grievance or Appeal was filed by a Provider or AR of
[[page 314]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 314 of 642
a Member, written Member consent is required for a Provider or AR to
withdraw the Grievance or Appeal.
4.6.6 Responsibilities in Expedited Appeals
Contractor must implement and maintain policies and procedures as described
below to resolve expedited Appeals. Contractor must follow the expedited Appeal
process when it determines or the requesting Provider indicates that taking the
time for a standard resolution could seriously jeopardize the Member’s life;
physical or mental health; or ability to attain, maintain, or regain maximum
function.
A. A Member, or a Provider or an AR with the Member’s written consent, may
file an expedited Appeal either orally or in writing. No additional follow-up
from the Member is required. Contractor must ensure that punitive action
is not taken against a Provider who requests an expedited resolution or
supports a Member’s Appeal.
B. Contractor must inform the Member of the limited time available for the
Member to present evidence and allegations of fact or law, in person, by
phone, or in writing, sufficiently in advance of the resolution timeframe.
C. Contractor must resolve an expedited Appeal as quickly as the Member’s
health condition requires, but no later than 72 hours from the day
Contractor receives the request for an expedited Appeal.
D. Contractor must make a reasonable effort to provide oral notice of an
expedited Appeal decision.
E. If Contractor denies a request for an expedited resolution of an Appeal, it
must process the request for an Appeal in accordance with the standard
Appeal process timeframes for resolutions and extensions as required in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.6.5 (Appeal Process).
4.6.7 State Hearings and Independent Medical Reviews
A. State Hearings
1) The Member, or a Provider or AR with the Member’s written
consent, may request a State Hearing:
a) After receiving a NAR confirming that Contractor has upheld
its ABD, and the request is made within 120 calendar days
from the date on the NAR;
[[page 315]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 315 of 642
b) In cases of Deemed Exhaustion, due to Contractor’s failure
to comply with Appeal notice and timing requirements as
required by 42 CFR sections 438.10, 438.402, 438.404,
438.406, 438.408, and 438.410; W&I sections 10951 and
10951.5; and as stated in this Contract, the Member may
immediately request a State Hearing. In cases of Deemed
Exhaustion, Contractor must not request a dismissal of the
State Hearing based on a failure to exhaust Contractor’s
internal Appeal process; or
c) If Contractor fails to provide Appeal notices required in 42
CFR section 438.408 to a Member with a visual impairment,
in the Member's selected alternative format and within the
applicable federal or State timeframes, the Member is
deemed to have exhausted Contractor’s internal Appeal
process and may immediately request a State Hearing. In
such cases, Contractor is prohibited from requesting
dismissal of a State Hearing on the basis of failure to
exhaust Contractor’s internal Appeal process.
2) Upon request from the Member, Contractor must assist the
Member with preparing for the State Hearing by providing the
Member or their AR with the Member’s case file, including Medical
Records, other documents and records, guidelines, clinical criteria,
and any new or additional evidence that Contractor relied on for its
initial denial and anything Contractor considered during its internal
Appeal process. This information must be provided free of charge
and sufficiently in advance of the resolution timeframe.
3) Contractor must provide its statement of position for the State
Hearing to the Member and to the California Department of Social
Services at least two Working Days before the State Hearing.
4) Contractor must ensure that an employee familiar with the facts of
the case and Contractor’s basis for upholding its ABD is available
to actively participate in the State Hearing by ensuring that the
employee is available and prepared to present Contractor’s position
and be subject to cross examination at the State Hearing as
required by 42 CFR sections 431.205 and 431.242 and Goldberg v.
Kelly (1970) 397 US 254. Contractor must ensure that it provides
accurate contact information for its State Hearing representative to
ensure an appearance at the State Hearing via telephone or in
person. Additionally, to ensure Member's right to due process
during the State Hearing process, Contractor must ensure that a
statement of position is timely filed with the California Department
of Social Services and provided to the Member not less than two
[[page 316]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 316 of 642
Working Days before the hearing as required by W&I section
10952.5.
5) In cases where the State Hearing decision overturns Contractor’s
decision, Contractor must authorize or provide the disputed
services promptly, and as expeditiously as the Member’s health
condition requires, but no later than 72 hours from the date
Contractor receives notice that the State Hearing decision reversed
Contractor’s decision.
6) Contractor must pay for disputed services if the Member received
the disputed services while the State Hearing was pending.
7) The parties to a State Hearing must include Contractor as well as
the Member, their AR, or the representative of a deceased
Member’s estate.
8) Contractor must notify Members that the State must make a
decision for a State Hearing within 90 calendar days of the date of
the State Hearing request. For an expedited State Hearing, DHCS
will take final administrative action as expeditiously as the
individual's health condition requires, but no later than three
Working Days after Contractor provides DHCS with the case file
and information supporting its Appeal of an ABD pursuant to W&I
section 10951.5. Contractor must also comply with all other
requirements as required by 42 CFR sections 438.410 and
438.404(a), W&I section 14029.91(e), 22 CCR sections 53876 and
53895, and APL 21-011.
B. Contractor’s Obligations for Expedited State Hearings
1) Within two Working Days of being notified by DHCS or the
California Department of Social Services that a Member has filed a
request for State Hearing which meets the criteria for expedited
resolution, Contractor must deliver directly to the
designated/appropriate California Department of Social Services
administrative law judge all information and documents which either
support, or which Contractor considered in connection with, the
action which is the subject of the expedited State Hearing. This
includes, but is not limited to, copies of the relevant Treatment
Authorization Request and NOA, plus any pertinent NAR and all
documents Contractor relied on for its denial, including clinical
criteria and guidelines. If the NOA or NARs are not in English,
Contractor must transmit fully translated copies to the California
Department of Social Services along with copies of the original
NOA and NARs.
[[page 317]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 317 of 642
2) Contractor must ensure that an employee familiar with the facts of
the case and Contractor’s basis for upholding its ABD is available
to actively participate in the expedited State Hearing by ensuring
that the employee is available and prepared to present Contractor’s
position during cross examination at the State Hearing as required
by 42 CFR sections 431.205 and 431.242 and Goldberg v. Kelly
(1970) 397 US 254. Contractor must ensure that it provides
accurate contact information for its State Hearing representative to
ensure an appearance at the Hearing via telephone or in person.
Additionally, to ensure Member's right to due process during the
State Hearing process, Contractor must ensure that its completed
case file, including the statement of position, is timely filed with the
California Department of Social Services as required by W&I
section 10951.5(b)(1).
C. Independent Medical Review
1) If applicable to Contractor’s plan model, Contractor must inform
Members of the right to request an IMR of an action resulting in a
Member request for an Appeal, or the outcome of an Appeal.
2) An IMR must be requested by the Member, or a Provider or AR
with written authorization from the Member to act on the Member’s
behalf. Contractor must not require a Member to request an IMR
before, or use one as a deterrent to, requesting a State Hearing.
3) IMRs must be conducted by the California Department of Managed
Healthcare (DMHC) independently from either the Member or
Contractor, and at no cost to the Member.
4) IMRs do not extend any of the time frames stated in this Contract
for Appeals, and do not disrupt the continuation of Covered
Services per 42 CFR section 438.420.
4.6.8 Continuation of Services Until Appeal and State Hearing Rights Are
Exhausted
A. Contractor must automatically continue providing the disputed services to
the Member while the Appeal and State Hearing are pending if all of the
following conditions are met:
1) The Member filed their Appeal within the required timeframes set
forth in 42 CFR section 438.420;
[[page 318]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 318 of 642
2) The Appeal involves the termination, suspension, or reduction of
previously authorized Covered Services;
3) The disputed services were ordered by the Member’s Provider; and
4) The period covered by the original authorization has not expired.
B. If Contractor, at the Member’s request, continues or reinstates the
provision of disputed services while an Appeal or State Hearing is
pending, those services must continue until:
1) The Member withdraws their request for an Appeal or a State
Hearing;
2) The Member fails to request a State Hearing and continuation of
disputed services within ten calendar days of when the NOA was
sent; or
3) The final State Hearing decision is adverse to the Member.
C. Contractor must pay for disputed services if the Member received the
disputed services while the Appeal or State Hearing was pending.
Contractor must ensure the Member is not billed for the continued
services even if the State Hearing or IMR finds the disputed services were
not Medically Necessary.
4.6.9 Grievance and Appeal Reporting and Data
A. Contractor must submit a Grievance and Appeal log to DHCS upon
request for Medi-Cal Members only in the form that is required by and
submitted to Department of Managed Health Care (DMHC), as set forth in
28 CCR section 1300.68(f), with additional information required by DHCS
per 42 CFR section 438.416 and 22 CCR section 53858(e).
B. Contractor must submit Grievance and Appeal data to DHCS monthly as
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.1.5 (Program Data
Reporting) and APL 20-017.
C. Contractor must comply with the requirements set forth in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 2.1 (Management Information System) of this
Contract for the reporting of Grievance and Appeal data.
D. Contractor must maintain records of Grievances and Appeals and must
have policies and procedures in place governing the review of the
information as part of its ongoing QIS. Contractor must identify systemic
patterns of wrongful denials and impose Corrective Action as necessary.
[[page 319]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 319 of 642
The records must be accurately maintained in a manner accessible to the
State and available to CMS upon request. Records must include all
required information set forth in 42 CFR section 438.416(b). Contractor
must ensure that all documents and records, whether in a written or
electronic format, generated or obtained by Contractor in the course of
responding to ABDs, Grievances, Appeals, and IMRs are retained for at
least 10 years pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.3(u).
[[page 320]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 320 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
5.0 Services – Scope and Delivery
DHCS has a longstanding commitment to ensure Members have access to high-
quality services. The provisions in this Article lay out DHCS expectations of
Contractor for promoting access to medical, behavioral, and social services;
increasing integration and collaboration across delivery systems and with local
partners; and ultimately improving health outcomes.
Through the provisions in this Article, several key goals of California Advancing
and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) are addressed. For example, Contractor must
manage the health care needs of the Member over time through a
comprehensive array of person-centered health and social services spanning all
levels of intensity of care, from birth to dignified end of life. This Article also
includes provisions related to Advance Directives and ensuring that Contractor
informs Members of what an Advance Directive is and how to put a valid one in
place. This Article contains key provisions related to information Members must
receive to help them navigate the health care system including information that
must be included in the Member Handbook and Provider Directory.
This Article also address access to evidence-based Behavioral Health care, with
a focus on integration with physician health and earlier identification and
engagement in treatment for Children, youth, and adults. Provisions included
here also implement No Wrong Door policies and outline expectations that
Contractor ensure Members receive timely mental health services without delay
regardless of the delivery system where they seek care. Contractors are
expected to ensure Members maintain treatment relationships with trusted
Providers without interruption, to the extent feasible.
This Article lays out expectations for services and access to community-based
Providers that provide social support including Dyadic Care Services, Doula
services, and Community Health Workers (CHW). The intent for enabling access
to these provider types is to improve health outcomes by meeting the Behavioral
Health (including emotional health and wellbeing), and physical health needs of
culturally diverse populations.
DHCS recognizes the importance of coordination and collaboration with other
local partners in order to meet the needs of the whole person. Accordingly,
DHCS sets forth requirements for Contractor to engage with local entities to
promote Member needs for not only Medically Necessary health care services
but also any supportive services as needed to treat the whole person and
prevent avoidable negative health and social outcomes for individual Members to
treat the whole person. This entails partnerships with Local Health Departments,
Local Educational and Government Agencies, and other local programs and
services including county social services departments, Child welfare
departments, and justice departments. This Article also establishes oversight of
[[page 321]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 321 of 642
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) requirements and requires referrals to
ensure Member care is coordinated and community-based resources, including
Community Supports, are availed. Beyond the MOU requirements, DHCS seeks
to embed the whole person care and community-informed care approach within
its Population Health Management (PHM) strategy and requires the same of
Contractor. As such, this Article includes provisions requiring Contractor
engagement with community representatives of diverse cultural and ethnic
backgrounds to develop its PHM strategies.
To empower Members to become active participants in their care, DHCS has
enhanced existing processes and created new channels for engagement for
Members, families, and the community. Historically, Medi-Cal managed care
plans are required to maintain a Community Advisory Committee (CAC), which
serves to inform Contractor’s cultural and linguistic services program. DHCS
seeks to elevate the CAC by clarifying its role and member composition and
prescribing Contractor’s role in providing support for CAC members in order to
maximize participation and involvement.
[[page 322]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 322 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
5.1 Member Services
5.1.1 Member Rights and Responsibilities
5.1.2 Member Services Staff
5.1.3 Member Information
5.1.4 Primary Care Provider Selection
5.1.5 Notices of Action for Denial, Deferral, or Modification of Prior Authorization
Requests
[[page 323]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 323 of 642
5.1 Member Services
5.1.1 Member Rights and Responsibilities
A. Member Rights and Responsibilities
Contractor must develop, implement, and maintain written policies and
procedures that set forth the Member's rights and responsibilities and
must communicate its policies to its Members, Providers, and, upon
request, Potential Members.
1) Contractor's written policies and procedures must include the
following Member rights:
a) To be treated with respect, giving due consideration to the
Member’s right to privacy and the need to maintain
confidentiality of the Member’s Protected Health Information
(PHI) and private information.
b) To be provided with information about Contractor’s
organization and all services available to Members.
c) To be able to choose their Primary Care Provider (PCP)
within Contractor's Network unless the PCP is unavailable or
is not accepting new patients.
d) To participate in decision-making regarding their health care,
including the right to refuse treatment.
e) To submit Grievances, either verbally or in writing, about
Contractor, Providers, care received, and any other
expression of dissatisfaction not related to an Adverse
Benefit Determination (ABD).
f) To request an Appeal of an ABD within 60 calendar days
from the date on the Notice of Adverse Benefit
Determination (NABD) and request how to continue benefits
during the in-plan Appeal process through the State Hearing,
when applicable.
g) To request a State Hearing, including information on the
circumstances under which an expedited State Hearing is
available.
h) To receive interpretation services and written translation of
critical informing materials in their preferred Threshold
[[page 324]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 324 of 642
Language, including oral interpretation and American Sign
Language.
i) To have a valid Advance Directive in place, and an
explanation to Members of what an Advance Directive is.
j) To have access to family planning services and sexually
transmitted disease services, from a Provider of their choice,
without referral or Prior Authorization, either in or outside of
Contractor's Network. To have Emergency Services
provided in or outside of Contractor’s Network, as required
pursuant to federal law.
k) To have access to Federally Qualified Health Centers
(FQHCs), Rural Health Centers (RHCs) and Indian Health
Care Providers (IHCP) outside of Contractor's Network,
pursuant to federal law.
l) To have access to, and receive a copy of, their Medical
Records, and request that they be amended or corrected, as
specified in 45 Code of Regulations (CFR) sections 164.524
and 164.526.
m) To change Medi-Cal managed care plans upon request, if
applicable.
n) To access Minor Consent Services.
o) To receive written Member informing materials in alternative
formats, including Braille, large size print no smaller than 20
point font, accessible electronic format, and audio format,
upon request and in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.10
and 45 CFR sections 84.52(d) and 92.102.
p) To be free from any form of restraint or seclusion used as a
means of coercion, discipline, convenience, or retaliation.
q) To receive information on available treatment options and
alternatives, presented in a manner appropriate for the
Member’s condition and ability to understand available
treatment options and alternatives.
r) To freely exercise these Member rights without retaliation or
any adverse conduct by Contractor, Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, Network Providers, or the
State.
[[page 325]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 325 of 642
2) Contractor must provide its written policies and procedures
regarding Member rights and responsibilities to its staff and all
Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors. Contractor must ensure that its staff, Network
Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors are
trained and knowledgeable on Members’ rights as required under
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 3.2 (Provider Relations).
B. Member’s Right to Confidentiality
Contractor must have policies and procedures in place to ensure
Members' rights to confidentiality of PHI and Personal Information (PI) in
accordance with 45 CFR parts 160 and 164, and in accordance with Civil
Code section 1798 et seq.
1) Contractor must ensure that all Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers have policies and
procedures in place to guard against unlawful disclosure of PHI, PI,
and any other Confidential Information to any unauthorized persons
or entities.
2) Contractor must inform and advise Members on the right to
confidentiality of their PHI and PI. Contractor must obtain the
Member's prior written authorization to release Confidential
Information, unless such prior written authorization is not required
by State and federal law.
C. Member’s Right to Advance Directives
Contractor must have written policies and procedures to ensure Members
are informed of what an Advance Directive is and how to put a valid
Advance Directive in place. Contractor must have policies and procedures
in place to ensure all involved in the Member’s care comply with the terms
of a Member’s valid Advance Directive in accordance with the
requirements of 42 CFR sections 422.128 and 438.3(j).
1) Contractor must ensure that its process for a Member’s right to
have an Advance Directive in place is included in the Member
Handbook. Information in the Member Handbook must include the
Member’s right to be informed by Contractor of State law regarding
Advance Directives, and to receive information from Contractor
regarding any changes to that law. Contractor must ensure that the
following statement, or similar language provided by DHCS is
included:
[[page 326]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 326 of 642
Advance care planning for Members enrolled in Medi-Cal palliative
care in accordance with All Plan Letter (APL) 18-020, must include
documented discussions between a physician or other qualified
healthcare professional and a patient, family member, or legally-
recognized decision-maker. Counseling that takes place during
these discussions addresses, but is not limited to, Advance
Directives, such as Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment
(POLST) forms.
2) Information on Advance Directives must comply with all State and
federal law requirements and must be updated to reflect any
changes to laws governing Advance Directives.
3) Contractor must ensure its Network Providers, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors are trained on complying with valid
Advance Directives in accordance with 42 CFR sections 422.128
and 438.3(j).
D. Interoperability Requirements for Member Records
Contractor must implement and maintain a Patient Access Application
Programming Interface (API) as specified in 42 CFR section 431.60 as if
such requirements applied directly to Contractor, and as set forth in APL
22-026. The Patient Access API must also meet the technical standards in
45 CFR section 170.215. Data maintained on or after January 1, 2016,
must be made available to facilitate the creation and maintenance of a
Member’s cumulative health record.
1) At a minimum, Contractor must permit third-party applications to
retrieve, with the approval and at the direction of the Member, the
following Member records:
a) Adjudicated claims data from Contractor, and from any
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors and Network
Providers, including claims data and cost data that may be
Appealed, or are in the process of Appeal, Provider
remittances, and Member cost-sharing pertaining to such
claims, within (1) Working Day after a claim is processed;
b) Encounter Data, including Encounter Data from any
capitated Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and
Network Providers, within one (1) Working Day after
receiving the data from Providers;
c) Clinical data, including diagnoses and related codes, and
laboratory test results, within one (1) Working Day after the
[[page 327]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 327 of 642
data is received by Contractor; and
d) Information about coverage for drugs administered in an
outpatient setting as part of medical services, and updates to
such information, including, if applicable, Member costs and
any preferred drug list information, within one (1) Working
Day after the effective date of any such information or
updates to such information.
2) Contractor may deny or discontinue any third-party application’s
connection to an API if it reasonably determines, consistent with its
security risk analysis under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Security Rule set forth in 45
CFR part 160 and 45 CFR part 164, subparts A and C, that
continued access presents an unacceptable level of risk to the
security of protected health information on its systems. The
determination must be made using objective verifiable criteria that
are applied fairly and consistently across all applications and
developers, including but not limited to criteria that may rely on
automated monitoring and risk mitigation tools.
E. Member Cost-Sharing Protections
1) Pursuant to The Social Security Act section 1932(b)(6) and 42 USC
section 1396u-2(b)(6), Contractor and all of its Subcontractors must
not hold a Member liable for any of the following:
a) Debts of Contractor in the event of Contractor’s insolvency;
b) Payment for Covered Services provided by Contractor if
Contractor has not received payment from DHCS, or if a
Provider, under an agreement or other arrangement with
Contractor, fails to receive payment from either DHCS or
Contractor; or
c) When payments to a Provider that furnishes Covered
Services under an agreement or other arrangement with
Contractor are in excess of the amount that normally would
be paid by the Member if the service had been received
directly from the Contractor.
2) Contractor, including its Network Providers and Subcontractors,
must not bill a Member for any Covered Services provided under
this Contract. Contractor must assure that all Network Provider
Agreements include requirements whereby the Member must be
held harmless for charges for any Covered Services.
[[page 328]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 328 of 642
3) Contractor and its Network Providers are prohibited from imposing
on Members cost-sharing requirements. Contractor’s Subcontractor
Agreements and Network Provider Agreements must specify that a
Provider agrees to accept Contractor’s reimbursement as payment
in full for services rendered to Members.
5.1.2 Member Services Staff
A. Contractor must employ and train a sufficient number of staff
knowledgeable about Contractor’s policies and procedures and capable of
providing information to Members or Potential Members.
B. Contractor must ensure its Member services staff are trained and
educated on all contractually required services for Members including
policies and procedures on the scope of services required to be offered
under this Contract, how to utilize services in the Medi-Cal program, how
to access carved out services, and how obtain referrals to appropriate
community resources and other agencies.
C. Contractor must ensure its Member services staff are educated on
assisting Members with disabilities, chronic conditions, and components of
Health Equity in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
5.2.11.C. (Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees). This
includes assisting Members with access barriers, disability access issues,
referral to appropriate clinical services, Grievance and Appeal resolution,
and State Hearings.
D. Contractor’s Member services staff must refer Potential Members to the
DHCS Enrollment broker when Potential Members request Enrollment
with Contractor.
E. Contractor’s Member services staff must refer Potential Members to their
local county office for Medi-Cal eligibility determinations or
redeterminations.
F. Contractor must ensure its Member services staff assist Members with a
warm hand-off to Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors when
Member services functions are delegated under a Subcontractor
Agreement or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement.
5.1.3 Member Information
A. Contractor must provide all new Members, and Potential Members upon
request, with information in compliance with 42 CFR section 438.10,
[[page 329]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 329 of 642
Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I) section 14406, 22 CCR section
53895, and as set forth in this provision.
B. Contractor must provide information as required in 42 CFR section
438.10, W&I section 14406, and 22 CCR section 53895 no later than
seven calendar days after the effective date of a Member's Enrollment.
C. Contractor must distribute the information required by Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.3 (Member Information), Paragraphs A-B
annually, and upon a Member’s request. Contractor must ensure the
information is current and has prior approval for distribution from DHCS.
D. All Member Information must be in a format that is easily understood and
in a font size no smaller than 12‑point, in compliance with all requirements
in 42 CFR sections 438.10, 438.404, and 438.408, W&I section 14029.91,
and 22 CCR section 53876. Member Information is defined in this
Contract and discussed in detail in APL 21-004. Member Information
includes, but is not limited to, the Member Handbook (also called the
Evidence of Coverage, or EOC), Provider Directory, and all mailings and
notices critical to obtaining services, including form letters, Notices of
Action (NOAs), NABDs, Grievances or Appeals, welcome packets,
Marketing information, preventive health reminders, Member surveys,
notices advising of the availability of free language assistance, and
newsletters.
E. If a Member or Potential Member requests Member Information in a format
other than as printed materials, Contractor must provide the Member
Information in the alternate formats, including Braille, large-size print font
no smaller than 20-point, accessible electronic format, or audio format.
F. Contractor must ensure that all Member Information is provided to
Members at a sixth grade reading level and approved by DHCS before
distribution. Member Information must inform Members on Contractor’s
processes and the Member’s right to make informed health decisions.
1) Contractor must submit to DHCS for review and approval their
policy and process for collecting requests and disseminating
materials in an alternative format when requested by Member.
2) For Members with disabilities, including visual impairment
Contractor must provide Member Information in all Threshold
Languages, alternative formats as specified by DHCS and in APL
21-004 and APL 22-002 (including Braille, large-size print font no
smaller than 20-point, accessible electronic format, audio compact
disc (CD) format, or data CD format), and through Auxiliary Aids at
no cost and upon request. Contractor must provide Member
[[page 330]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 330 of 642
Information in a timely fashion appropriate for the format being
requested and taking into consideration the special needs of
Members with disabilities or Limited English Proficiency (LEP)
Members.
a) Contractor must inform Members who exhibit or mention
difficulty reading print communications of their right to
receive Auxiliary Aids and services, including alternative
formats.
b) For Members who request an electronic alternative format to
receive Member information, Contractor must inform the
Member that, unless they request a password-protected
format, the Member Information will be provided in an
electronic format that is not password protected, which may
make the information more vulnerable to loss or misuse.
Contractor must clearly communicate to Members that they
may request an encrypted electronic format with
unencrypted instructions on how the Member can access the
encrypted information.
c) Contractor must accommodate the communication needs of
qualified individuals with disabilities, which may include
communication with the Member’s Authorized
Representative (AR) or someone with whom it is appropriate
for Contractor to communicate, such as a Member’s disabled
spouse. For these qualified individuals, Contractor must
facilitate alternative format requests as identified in this
Paragraph, as well as requests for other Auxiliary Aids and
services.
3) Contractor must establish policies and procedures to ensure
Members receive all Member Information in a Threshold Language
or alternative format of their choice as required by 42 CFR section
438.10, W&I section 14029.91, and Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.10.B (Access Rights).
4) Contractor must post a DHCS-approved nondiscrimination notice.
Contractor must also post a notice with language taglines in a
conspicuously visible font size in English, at least the top 15 non-
English languages in the State, and any other languages, as
determined by DHCS, explaining the availability of free language
assistance services, including written translation and oral
interpretation, and information on how to request Auxiliary Aids and
services, including materials in alternative formats. The
nondiscrimination notice and the notice with taglines must include
[[page 331]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 331 of 642
Contractor's toll-free and Telephone Typewriters
(TTY)/Telecommunication Devices for the Deaf (TDD) telephone
number for obtaining these services, and must be posted as
follows:
a) In a conspicuous place in all physical locations where
Contractor interacts with the public;
b) In a location on Contractor’s website that is accessible on
Contractor’s home page, and in a manner that allows
Members, Potential Members, and members of the public to
easily locate the information; and
c) In the Member Handbook/EOC, and in all Member
Information, informational notices, and materials critical to
obtaining services targeted to Members, Potential Members,
applicants, and the public at large, in accordance with APL
21-004 and APL 22-002, 42 CFR section 438.10(d)(2)-(3),
and W&I section 14029.91(a)(3) and (f).
5) Contractor’s nondiscrimination notice must include all information
required by W&I section 14029.91(e), any additional information
required by DHCS, and must provide information on how to file a
Discrimination Grievance with:
a) Both Contractor and the DHCS Office of Civil Rights, if there
is a concern of discrimination based on sex, race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, ethnic group identification,
age, mental disability, physical disability, medical condition,
genetic information, health status, marital status, gender,
gender identity, or sexual orientation, or identification with
any other persons or groups defined in Penal Code section
422.56; and
b) The United States Department of Health and Human
Services (U.S. DHHS) Office for Civil Rights if there is a
concern of discrimination based on race, color, national
origin, sex, age, or disability, per W&I section
14029.91(e)(5).
G. Member Information Noticing in Electronic Format
1) Contractor has the option to send Members a notice in Member
welcome packets or annual informational mailings to inform
Members of how to obtain their Provider Directory and Member
Handbook electronically or in a paper version if preferred. The
[[page 332]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 332 of 642
notice can be an insert, flyer, or other form of noticeable
communication.
a) Contractor may provide Seniors and Persons with
Disabilities (SPDs) a notice in lieu of a paper Member
Handbook in Member welcome packets. Contractor must still
provide all SPDs with the paper form of the Provider
Directory. The paper form of the Provider Directory may be a
personalized, shorter version of the full-sized Provider
Directory.
b) Contractor may provide their non-SPD, dual eligible
Members a notice on how to access the Provider Directory
and Member Handbook electronically in lieu of a paper
version in Member welcome packets.
c) Contractor may provide all Members, except SPDs, a notice
in lieu of a paper Provider Directory and Member Handbook
for annual informational mailings.
2) Prior to using a notice, Contractor must submit the following to
DHCS for approval:
a) A written proposal on Contractor’s letterhead addressed to
“DHCS Contract Manager” requesting to use a notice
instead of mailing the informing materials. The proposal
must include the following:
i. An overview of Contractor’s process for utilizing the
notice and how Contractor will meet all notice
requirements.
ii. An explanation of the notice’s purpose, including a
description of the Member population(s) who will
receive the notice.
iii. Time frame for implementation.
iv. A statement that Contractor is complying with all
applicable State and federal laws, the requirements of
this Contract, and other DHCS guidance, including
APLs and Policy Letters (PLs).
v. For Member packages only, a proposal of how
Contractor will move toward creating a personalized
Provider Directory, with a timeline included that
[[page 333]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 333 of 642
covers the cycle of production to delivery of
personalized Provider Directories.
vi. Any other pertinent information necessary for DHCS
to review.
b) A written policy and procedure describing in detail the
process Contractor will utilize for the notice and how
Contractor will continue to meet all language and format
requirements set forth in 42 CFR section 438.10(d)(3),
Provider Directory and website requirements in accordance
with 42 CFR section 438.10(h), and sub-contractual
relationship and delegation requirements set forth in 42 CFR
section 438.230.
c) A sample of Contractor’s proposed notice regarding
electronic communications. The notice must be easily
identifiable by the Member, state the purpose of each piece
of Member material offered, and identify the options
Members will have for receiving their Member materials.
3) The notice must be compliant with all the requirements of this
Contract and DHCS policy, and federal and State statutes and
regulations on Member Information, including 42 CFR sections
438.10 and 438.404, and W&I section 14029.91. DHCS will
approve Contractor’s notices on a case-by-case basis.
4) DHCS reserves the right to require Contractor to revert to sending
printed copies of the Provider Directory and Member Handbook to
its Members, at any time.
H. Provider Directory
1) Contractor must submit its complete Provider Directory to DHCS for
review and approval prior to initial operations.
2) Contractor must make its Provider Directory available to all
Members and to DHCS for distribution as required.
3) Contractor’s Provider Directory must be available in both paper and
electronic formats. Provider Directory information must be included
with Contractor’s written Member Information for new Members,
and thereafter available upon request. An electronic Provider
Directory must be posted on Contractor’s website in a machine
readable and accessible file and format.
[[page 334]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 334 of 642
4) Contractor must update and submit its paper and electronic
Provider Directories to DHCS in accordance with 42 CFR section
438.10(h)(3)(i)(A)-(B). Contractor must submit under the following
timelines:
a) A paper Provider Directory must be updated at least
monthly, if Contractor does not have a mobile-enabled,
electronic Provider Directory; or quarterly, if Contractor has a
mobile-enabled, electronic Provider Directory; and
b) An electronic Provider Directory must be updated no later
than one week after Contractor receives updated provider
information.
5) Contractor’s Provider Directory submission must include complete,
accurate and updated Provider Directory and Network information
and data and submit as required by 42 CFR section 438.10(h)(3).
Contractor’s Provider Directory must also comply with all
requirements in PL 11-009. DHCS is authorized to require changes
or corrections to Contractor’s Provider Directory at any time.
6) Contractor must implement and maintain a publicly accessible
standards-based Provider Directory API, as described in 42 CFR
section 431.70 and APL 22-026, which must include the information
required here in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.1.3.H
(Member Information). The Provider Directory API must meet the
technical standards in 45 CFR section 170.215, excluding the
security protocols related to user authentication and authorization.
7) Provider Directories must comply with 42 CFR section 438.10(h)
and H&S section 1367.27, and must include the following
information for in-Network PCP, Specialists, hospitals, Enhanced
Care Management (ECM), Community Support Providers,
Behavioral Health Providers, and any other Providers (e.g.,
Community Health Workers (CHW)) contracted for Medi-Cal
Covered Services:
a) The Provider’s or site’s location name and any group
affiliation(s), National Provider Identifier (NPI) number, street
address(es), all telephone numbers associated with the
practice site, and, if applicable, website URL for each
Service Location;
b) Provider’s specialty type and paneling status that allows
them to treat specific populations, including but not limited
[[page 335]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 335 of 642
to, whether they are a California Children’s Services (CCS
paneled provider;
c) Whether the Provider is accepting new patients;
d) Information on the Provider’s affiliated medical group or
Independent Physician/Provider Associations (IPA), NPI
number, address, telephone number, and, if applicable,
website URL for each Physician Provider of affiliated group
or IPA;
e) The hours and days when each Service Location is open,
including the availability of evening or weekend hours;
f) The services and benefits available, including accessibility
symbols approved by DHCS confirming whether the
office/facility (exam room(s), equipment, etc.) can
accommodate Members with physical disabilities as required
by PL 11-009;
g) The Provider’s cultural and linguistic capabilities, including
whether non-English languages and American Sign
Language are offered either by the Provider or a skilled
medical interpreter at the Provider’s facility;
h) The telephone number to call after normal business hours;
i) Identification of Network Providers or sites that are not
available to all or new Members
j) The link to the Medi-Cal Rx Pharmacy Locator, which can be
found on the dedicated Medi-Cal Rx website described in
APL 22-012.
I. Member Handbook
Contractor must comply with the requirements in 22 CCR section
53895(b) by distributing a Member Handbook, also known as an Evidence
of Coverage and Disclosure Form (EOC/DF) to each Member and to
Potential Members, upon request. The Member Handbook must meet all
requirements in 42 CFR section 438.10(g), 22 CCR section 53881, and
any other requirements in State and federal law, and this Contract. In
addition, the Member Handbook must meet all applicable requirements
contained in 42 CFR section 438.10(d), W&I section 14029.91, 22 CCR
section 53876 for Limited English Proficiency (LEP) Members and
[[page 336]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 336 of 642
Potential Members and H&S section 1363 as to translation, print size,
readability, and understandability of text.
1) Contractor must provide to each Member, or Member’s family unit,
a Member Handbook that constitutes a full and fair disclosure of the
Member’s right to obtain and Contractor’s provision of all Medi-Cal
services that are available and accessible to the Member.
Contractor must post its most recent Member Handbook to its
website.
2) Contractor must use the DHCS template for its Member Handbook.
Contractor must submit its information that is specific to Contractor,
where applicable. Contractor must submit its completed Member
Handbook, with all Contractor-specific information included in
redline, for review and approval by DHCS before distribution to
Members.
3) Contractor must make the revised Member Handbook available to
Members based on the timeframes required by State and federal
law and at any time DHCS, a Member, or a Potential Member
requests a copy.
4) Although Contractor is required to use the DHCS Member
Handbook template, Contractor remains solely responsible for
ensuring that Members receive the following information through
the Member Handbook:
a) Contractor’s name, address, toll-free telephone number(s)
for Member services, Medi-Cal Rx telephone number(s) and
website information, any other Contractor staff providing
services directly to Members, and information on
Contractor’s Service Area;
b) Information on how to access services in the Medi-Cal
managed care system, including a description of the full
amount, duration, and scope of Covered Services and how
to obtain services under this Contract. The Member
Information must also include information on services that
require Prior Authorization and how to request it, health
education and how to access appropriate community
resources and other agencies, interpretive services provided
by Contractor’s staff and at service sites, and an explanation
of "carved- out" services, including Specialty Mental Health
Services, and any service limitations and exclusions from
coverage or charges for services. The Member Handbook
must also include information on services to which
[[page 337]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 337 of 642
Contractor, Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or a
Network Provider may have a moral objection to perform or
support and alternative methods for obtaining those
services;
c) Procedures for accessing Covered Services, which explain
that Covered Services will be obtained through Contractor’s
Network Providers unless otherwise allowed under this
Contract;
d) A description of the Member identification card issued by
Contractor, if applicable, and an explanation of its use in
authorizing or assisting Members in obtaining services;
e) Procedures for selecting or requesting a change in PCP at
any time, any requirements for a Member to change their
PCP, reasons for which a request for a specific PCP may be
denied, and reasons why a PCP may request a change;
f) The purpose and value of scheduling and completing an
Initial Health Appointment (IHA);
g) The availability and procedures for obtaining after-hours
services 24 hours a day, seven days a week, including the
appropriate Network Provider locations and telephone
numbers to obtain services. This must include an
explanation of the Members’ right to interpretive services, at
no cost, to assist in receiving after-hours services;
h) Definition of what constitutes an Emergency Medical
Condition, Emergency Services, and post-stabilization
services. The Member Handbook must expressly state that
Prior Authorization is not required to receive Emergency
Services and include the use of 9-1-1 for obtaining
Emergency Services;
i) The right to receive Emergency Services in any hospital or
other setting, and procedures for obtaining Emergency
Services from specified Network Providers or from out-of-
Network Providers, including Emergency Services outside of
Contractor's Service Area. This includes the right to the
provision of at least a 72-hour supply of Medically Necessary
medication in an emergency situation is provided;
j) Process for referral to Specialists, including an explanation
of the Prior Authorization process, in sufficient detail so the
[[page 338]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 338 of 642
Member can understand how the process works, including
authorization and referral timeframes and alternative access
standards as required by W&I section 14197.04, APL 23-
001, and APL 21-011;
k) Procedures for obtaining Emergency Medical Transportation
(EMT) and Non-Emergency transportation services to
service sites that are offered by Contractor or available
through the Medi-Cal program, and how to obtain such
services. Include a description of medical transportation,
including EMT, Non-Medical Transportation (NMT) and Non-
Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT) services, and
how Contractor coordinates access to appropriate
transportation, when needed;
l) The right to file a Grievance and request an Appeal with
Contractor, and procedures for filing either orally, in writing,
or over the phone. Contractor must inform Members of all
Appeal and State Hearing rights when it makes a decision to
deny, delay or modify a Member’s request for services as set
forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member
Grievance and Appeal System);
m) Information on disenrollment from Contractor. Contractor
must ensure that the following information is included:
i. The causes for which a Member may lose eligibility to
receive services under this Contract as set forth in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.2.2
(Disenrollment), and the procedures for disenrollment
due to the loss of eligibility.
ii. An explanation of the expedited disenrollment
process for Members qualifying under conditions
specified under 22 CCR section 53889(j), which
includes Children receiving services under the Foster
Care or Adoption Assistance Programs, Members
who require out-of-Network transplant services if they
are unavailable in-Network, and Members already
enrolled in another Medi-Cal, Medicare, or
commercial managed care plan.
n) An explanation of the Member's right to disenroll at any time,
and reenroll in the competing Medi-Cal managed care plan
in the county (in counties where another Medi-Cal managed
care plan is available), subject to the requirements in 22
[[page 339]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 339 of 642
CCR 53889, 22 CCR 53891(c) and any restricted
disenrollment period;
o) Information on the Member's right to a Medi-Cal State
Hearing, the process for obtaining a State Hearing, the
timeframe to request a State Hearing, and the rules that
govern representation in a State Hearing. Contractor must
ensure the following information is included:
i. The circumstances under which an expedited State
Hearing is possible;
ii. Information stating that Contractor will assist in
completing the State Hearing request when a health
care service requested by the Member or Provider
has been denied, delayed, or modified, as required by
APL 21-011;
iii. The timelines which govern a Member’s right to a
State Hearing, pursuant to W&I section 10951 and for
an expedited State Hearing pursuant to W&I section
10951.5;
iv. The Department of Social Services (DSS) Public
Inquiry and Response Unit toll-free telephone number
(1-800-952-5253) to request a State Hearing; and
v. Contractor’s obligation to continue the disputed
service(s) until there is a final decision on the State
Hearing as long as if the Member requests a State
Hearing in the specified timeframe(s) as required by
42 CFR section 438.420.
p) The availability of, and procedures for obtaining services at
FQHCs, RHCs and IHCPs;
q) The Member's right to seek family planning services from
any qualified family planning Provider in the Medi-Cal
program, including out-of-Network Providers; how to access
these services; that a referral is not necessary; and a
description of the limitations on the services that Members
may seek out-of-Network. The DHCS Office of Family
Planning toll-free telephone number (1-800-942-1054) that
provides consultation and referral to family planning clinics
must also be included. Contractor must ensure that the
[[page 340]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 340 of 642
following statement, or similar language provided by DHCS
is included:
Family planning services are provided to Members of
childbearing age to enable them to determine the number
and spacing of Children. These services include all methods
of birth control approved by the Federal Food and Drug
Administration. As a Member, you pick a doctor who is
located near you and will give you the services you need.
Our Primary Care Providers and OB/GYN Specialists are
available for family planning services. For family planning
services, you may also pick a doctor or clinic not connected
with [Plan Name] without having to get permission from [Plan
Name]. [Plan Name] will pay that doctor or clinic for the
family planning services you get.
r) Procedures for providing female Members with direct access
to an in-Network women’s health Specialist for women’s
preventive and routine health care services without requiring
Prior Authorization. Access to a women’s health Specialist
must be provided in addition to the Member’s designated
PCP if the PCP is not a women’s health Specialist;
s) Information on the availability of and procedures for
obtaining Certified Nurse Midwife (CNM) and Nurse
Practitioner services, pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.8.G. (Specific Requirements for Access to
Programs and Covered Services);
t) Information on how to access the DHCS Medi-Cal Managed
Care Ombudsman Program and toll-free telephone number
(1-888-452-8609), and the DMHC HMO Consumer Service
toll-free telephone number (1-800-400-0815) for resolution of
Member concerns and complaints;
u) Information on the provision and availability of services
covered under the California Children’s Services (CCS)
Program from out-of-Network Providers, and how to access
CCS Program;
v) Information on how to obtain Minor Consent Services
through Contractor's Network, an explanation of those
services, and information on how Minor Consent Services
can also be obtained from out-of-Network Providers without
requiring Prior Authorization;
[[page 341]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 341 of 642
w) Information on the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic
and Treatment (EPSDT) benefit for Members less than 21
years of age, and that it includes all Medically Necessary
health care, diagnostic services, treatments, and other
measures listed in 42 United States Code (USC) section
1396d(a) and (r), whether or not covered under the
California Medicaid State Plan. All EPSDT services are
Covered Services unless expressly excluded under this
Contract;
x) An explanation on how to use the Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service
(FFS) system when Medi-Cal services are excluded or
limited under this Contract, and how to obtain additional
information;
y) An explanation that an American Indian Member's status as
a Member is voluntary and that an American Indian Member
cannot be required to enroll in a Medi-Cal managed care
plan and has the right to access IHCP, choose an IHCP
within Contractor’s Network as a PCP, and disenroll from
Contractor at any time, without cause;
z) Language regarding the positive benefits of organ donations
and how a Member can become an organ or tissue donor,
pursuant to H&S section 7158.2. This information must be
provided in the Member Handbook as well as Contractor’s
newsletter and any other direct communication with
Members, and must be provided the Members annually
under H&S section 7158.2;
aa) Confirmation of whether Contractor offers financial bonuses
or other incentives to its Network Providers. This information
must inform the Member of the right to request additional
information about these bonuses or incentives from
Contractor, their Network Provider, or the Network Provider’s
medical group or IPA, pursuant to H&S section 1367.10;
bb) Instructions on how a Member can request a copy of, or the
website link to locate, Contractor’s non-proprietary clinical
and administrative policies and procedures;
cc) That oral interpreter services are available for any language
spoken by the Member, and that the Member can inform
Contractor of their preferred language to receive written
translations of Member materials in the identified Threshold
Languages, both free of charge, with instruction on
[[page 342]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 342 of 642
Contractor’s obligations to ensure these services are
provided;
dd) That Auxiliary Aids and services are available upon request
and at no cost for Members with disabilities, and how to
access these services;
ee) Information on how to report suspected Fraud, Waste and
Abuse; and
ff) Information on how to request Community Supports.
J. Member Identification Card
Contractor must provide an identification card to each Member, which
identifies the Member and authorizes them to access Covered Services.
The card must inform the Member that they may seek Emergency
Services from out-of-Network Providers. The card must inform the
Member of the Medi-Cal Rx telephone number. The Member identification
card must also inform the Member that Emergency Services are covered
by Contractor without Prior Authorization, and at no cost to the Member.
5.1.4 Primary Care Provider Selection
A. Contractor must implement and maintain DHCS-approved procedures to
ensure that each new Member who is not enrolled in comprehensive
Other Health Coverage (OHC) has an appropriate and available PCP.
Comprehensive OHC refers to:
1) Members with the OHC Code indicator C, H, F, K, or P as listed in
the 834 file, or,
2) OHC with a scope of coverage of at least Outpatient, Inpatient, and
Medical/Allied (OIM) Services found in positions 119 through 126 in
the Health Insurance System Database (HISDB) file.
B. Contractor must provide each new Member an opportunity to select a PCP
within the first 30 calendar days of Enrollment. Contractor must make best
efforts to ensure the Member is assigned to the PCP the Member selected
at the time of their Enrollment, unless the PCP is unavailable or is not
accepting new patients.
C. If the Member does not select a PCP within 30 calendar days of the
effective date of Enrollment, Contractor must assign that Member to a
PCP and notify the Member and the assigned PCP no later than 40
[[page 343]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 343 of 642
calendar days after the Member’s Enrollment. Contractor must ensure that
adverse selection does not occur when Members are assigned to PCPs.
1) Contractor must allow Members to select a clinic that provides
Primary Care in lieu of selecting a specific PCP, where available.
2) If Contractor’s Network includes Nurse Practitioners (NP), Certified
Nurse Midwives (CNMs), OB-GYN, or Physician Assistants, the
Member may select one of these practitioners as their PCP within
30 calendar days of Enrollment to provide Primary Care services in
accordance with 22 CCR section 53853(a)(4).
3) SPD Members may select a Specialist or clinic as a PCP if the
Specialist or clinic agrees to serve as the Member’s PCP and is
qualified to treat the health conditions of the SPD Member, in
accordance with W&I section 14182(b)(11).
4) Contractor must ensure that Members are allowed to change their
PCP, NP, CNM, or Physician Assistant assignment, upon request,
by selecting a different PCP from Contractor’s Network.
D. Contractor must inform Members through direct outreach to provide an
explanation for the reason the Member could not be assigned to their
selected PCP.
E. Contractor must ensure that Members who have an established
relationship with a Network Provider, and who want to continue their
patient-Provider relationship, are assigned to that Provider without
disruption in the Member’s care if the Member's existing relationship
meets the requirements set forth in APL 18-008 (revised).
F. Contractor must ensure that Members can choose Traditional and Safety-
Net Providers as their PCP, and that American Indian Members may
choose an IHCP within Contractor’s Network as their PCP.
G. Contractor is not obligated to require full benefit dual eligible Members to
select a Medi-Cal PCP. Nothing in this section must be construed to
require Contractor to pay for services that would otherwise be paid for by
Medicare.
H. If a Member does not select a PCP within 30 calendar days of the
effective date of Enrollment, Contractor must use utilization data or other
data sources in its possession or provided by DHCS to select a PCP for
the Member. This includes review of electronic data to confirm existing
Provider relationships for the purpose of PCP assignment, including a
Specialist or clinic for an SPD if they have indicated they have a
[[page 344]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 344 of 642
preference for either to act as their PCP. Contractor must comply with all
federal and State privacy laws in the provision and use of this data.
I. Contractor must notify the PCP that a Member has selected or been
assigned to the Provider within ten calendar days from the date selection
or assignment is complete.
J. Contractor must maintain procedures that proportionately include
contracting with Traditional and Safety-Net Providers in the assignment
process for Members who do not choose a PCP. Contractors in public
hospital health system counties must assign PCPs in compliance with W&I
section 14199.1.
[[page 345]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 345 of 642
5.1.5 Notices of Action for Denial, Deferral, or Modification of Prior Authorization
Requests
Contractor must notify Members of a decision to deny, defer, or modify requests
for Prior Authorization, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.210(c) and 22
CCR sections 51014.1 and 53894 by providing a NOA to Members and/or their
AR, regarding any denial, deferral, or modification of a request for approval to
provide a health care service. This notification must be provided in accordance
with all requirements set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.6.4
(Notice of Action).
[[page 346]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 346 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
5.2 Network and Access to Care
5.2.1 Access to Network Providers and Covered Services
5.2.2 Network Capacity
5.2.3 Network Composition
5.2.4 Network Ratios
5.2.5 Network Adequacy Standards
5.2.6 Access to Emergency Service Providers and Emergency Services
5.2.7 Out-of-Network Access
5.2.8 Specific Requirements for Access to Programs and Covered Services
5.2.9 Network and Access Changes to Covered Services
5.2.10 Access Rights
5.2.11 Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees
5.2.12 Continuity of Care for Seniors and Persons with Disabilities
5.2.13 Network Reports
5.2.14 Site Review
5.2.15 Street Medicine
[[page 347]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 347 of 642
5.2 Network and Access to Care
5.2.1 Access to Network Providers and Covered Services
A. Primary Care
1) Contractor must ensure that each Member has an assigned
Primary Care Provider (PCP) who is available and physically
present at the Service Location for sufficient time to ensure access
and appointments for the assigned Member when medically
required. This requirement does not preclude an appropriately
licensed Provider from being a substitute for the Member’s
assigned PCP in the event of vacation, illness, or other unforeseen
circumstances.
2) Contractor must have processes in place to assist Members in
selecting PCPs who are accepting new patients.
3) Contractor must consider the requirements in Welfare and
Institutions Code (W&I) section 14182(b)(11) when assigning
Members who are Seniors and Persons with Disabilities (SPD) to a
PCP. Additionally, Contractor must ensure that Members have the
option of selecting an Indian Health Care Provider (IHCP),
Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC), or Rural Health Clinic
(RHC), as their PCP, where available.
B. Specialists
1) Contractor must ensure that Members have access to Specialists
for Medically Necessary Covered Services in accordance with W&I
section 14197, 22 CCR section 53853, and 28 CCR section
1300.67.2.2.
2) Contractor must maintain an adequate Network that includes adult
and pediatric Specialists, and at a minimum, the core Specialists
required in W&I section 14197(h)(2), within its Network to ensure
Medically Necessary specialty care is available in accordance with
22 CCR section 53853(a), and W&I sections 14182(c)(2) and
14197.
C. Contractor must ensure its Network Providers, Subcontractors, and
Downstream Subcontractors have adequate Networks and staff within its
Service Area, including Physicians, nurses, and administrative and other
support staff to ensure that they have sufficient capacity to provide and
coordinate care for Covered Services are provided in accordance with
[[page 348]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 348 of 642
W&I section 14197, 22 CCR section 53853, 28 CCR section 1300.67.2.2,
and all requirements in this contract.
D. Contractor must monitor Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors
to ensure they can adequately deliver culturally and linguistically
competent care including offering interpreter services when a Limited
English Proficient (LEP) Member accesses a Provider who does not speak
the Member's language.
E. Contractor must ensure that Members have access to all Non-specialty
Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder (SUD) Covered Services in
accordance with 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.900
et seq. Contractor must coordinate care for all Specialty Mental Health
Services (SMHS) and SUD services and provide referrals including
mechanisms to track completion of follow up visits, to the county mental
health plan (MHP) and Drug Medi-Cal (DMC) or Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System (DMC-ODS) services as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Section 5.5 (Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Benefits)
5.2.2 Network Capacity
A. Contractor must maintain a Network adequate to provide the full scope of
benefits to 60 percent of all Potential Members or current Member
Enrollment, whichever is higher, within its Service Area. Contractor must
increase the capacity of the Network as necessary to accommodate all
Enrollment growth beyond the 60 percent.
B. Contractor may request to renegotiate its Network capacity requirement
with DHCS if utilization by Contractor’s Members does not exceed 75
percent of the required Network capacity, after the first 12 months of
operation. Any such change is subject to DHCS review and approval.
5.2.3 Network Composition
A. Contractor must maintain an adequate Network within its Service Area, in
compliance with W&I section 14197, and if necessary to ensure contract
compliance with Network adequacy. Contractor may offer to contract with
Providers in adjoining Service Areas but must make good faith efforts to
contract with Providers within Contractor’s Service Area. Contractor’s
Network must include at a minimum adult and pediatric PCPs, obstetrics,
and gynecology (OB/GYNs), adult and pediatric Behavioral Health
Providers, adult and pediatric Non-specialty outpatient Mental Health
Service (NSMHS) Providers, adult and pediatric Specialists, hospitals, and
Long-Term Care (LTC) Providers to ensure adequate access to all
Medically Necessary Covered Services for all Members and to meet all
Network adequacy requirements.
[[page 349]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 349 of 642
B. Contractor must maintain an adequate Network of Allied Health
Personnel, supportive paramedical personnel, public hospitals and health
care systems, care navigators, caseworkers, and public health nurses,
and an adequate number of accessible service sites to ensure adequate
access to all Medically Necessary Covered Services for all Members.
C. Contractor must include in its Network, where available, IHCP, FQHC,
RHCs, Freestanding Birthing Centers (FBC), Certified Nurse Midwives
(CNMs), and Licensed Midwives (LM) in accordance with W&I section
14087.325, Medicaid State Health Official Letter #16-006, All Plan Letter
(APL) 18-022, and APL 23-001.
1) If Contractor is a local initiative health plan model, it must offer to
contract with all FQHCs and RHCs in its county(ies), in accordance
with W&I section 14087.325. Local initiative health plans must
maintain and provide supporting documentation of all contracting
efforts with each FQHC and RHC in its county(ies) to DHCS upon
request, even if Contractor has a minimum of one active contract
with an FQHC and RHC in their county(ies).
2) If Contractor is not a local initiative health plan model, it must
contract with a sufficient number of and include at least one FQHC,
one RHC, and one FBC in the Network, where available in
Contractor’s Service Area(s), to the extent that the FQHC, RHC,
and FBC Providers are licensed and recognized under State law.
D. Contractor must offer to contract with all IHCP available in each
county(ies) in which Contractor operates in accordance with 22 CCR
section 55120. If Contractor is unable to contract with an IHCP, Contractor
must allow eligible Members to obtain services from out-of-Network IHCP
in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.14.
E. Contractor must make good faith efforts to contract with at least one
cancer center within their Networks and subcontracted Networks, if
applicable, within each county in which Contractor operates for the
provision of Covered Services to any eligible Member diagnosed with
complex cancer diagnosis in accordance with W&I section 14197.45.
F. Contractor must continually ensure that the composition of its Network
meets the ethnic, cultural, and linguistic needs of Contractor's Members.
G. Contractor must have an adequate number of NSMHS Providers to
provide Medically Necessary, NSMHS based on current and anticipated
utilization trends for its Members.
[[page 350]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 350 of 642
H. Contractor must include in its Network any traditional and Safety-Net
Provider that is willing to contract under the same terms and conditions
that Contractor offers to any other similar Provider in accordance with 22
CCR section 53800(b)(2)(C)(1).
I. Contractor must ensure that every LTC Provider in its Service Area that is
licensed by the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) as a
qualified LTC Provider is included in Contractor’s Network, to the extent
that the LTC Provider remains licensed, certified, operating, and is willing
to enter into a Network Provider Agreement with Contractor on mutually
agreeable terms and meets Contractor’s Credentialing and quality
standards. If Contractor determines that additional LTC Providers are
necessary to meet the needs of its Members, Contractor must offer to
contract or enter into a letter of agreement with any additional CDPH
licensed LTC Providers in its Service Area or in adjoining Service Areas.
J. Contractor must receive a preapproval or assessment of suitability from
CDPH prior to the execution of a Network Provider Agreement for LTC
Providers undergoing a change of ownership. Network Provider
Agreements must have a clause that LTC Providers must notify Contractor
if it is undergoing a change of ownership so Contractor can obtain
preapproval or assessment of suitability from CDPH.
K. Contractor must ensure that every CBAS Provider within Contractor’s
Service Area, that has been approved by the California Department of
Aging (CDA) as a CBAS Provider, is included in Contractor’s Network to
the extent that the CBAS Provider remains licensed as an Adult Day
Health Care (ADHC) Center, is certified and enrolled as a Medi-Cal
Provider, is willing to enter into a Network Provider Agreement with
Contractor on mutually agreeable terms, and meets Contractor’s
credentialing and quality standards. Contractor must contract with a
sufficient number of Community-Based Adult Service (CBAS) Providers to
timely meet the needs of Members who are CBAS-eligible. Contractor
must have an adequate number of CBAS Providers that are
geographically located within one hour’s transportation time of its CBAS-
eligible Members and that are appropriate for and proficient in addressing
CBAS-eligible Members' specialized health needs and acuity,
communication, cultural, and language needs and preferences. Contractor
must also meet expected CBAS-utilization without a waitlist.
5.2.4 Network Ratios
A. Contractor must continually comply with 22 CCR sections 53853(a)(1) -
(2) and ensure that its Network meets the following full-time equivalent
(FTE) Physician to Member ratios:
[[page 351]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 351 of 642
1) FTE Primary Care Providers that are Physicians: Member
1:2,000
2) FTE Total Physicians: Member
1:1,200
B. Contractor must ensure that FTE non-physician medical practitioner’s
Member caseload does not exceed 1,000 patients in accordance with 22
CCR section 53853(a)(3).
C. Contractor must ensure compliance with 22 CCR sections 51240 and
51241, and Business and Professions Code sections 3516 and 2836.1.
Contractor must ensure full-time equivalent Physician supervisor to non-
physician medical practitioner ratios do not exceed the following:
1) Physician Supervisor: Nurse Practitioners
1:4
2) Physician Supervisor: Physician Assistants
1:4
3) A Physician supervisor may not supervise more than four non-
physician medical practitioners in any combination.
5.2.5 Network Adequacy Standards
A. Timely Access
1) Contractor must continuously monitor and enforce Network
Providers’, Subcontractors’, and Downstream Subcontractors’
compliance with the requirements in W&I section 14197(d)(1)(A),
28 CCR section 1300.67.2.2, and the requirements in this Contract.
2) Contractor must develop, implement, and maintain procedures to
monitor and ensure that Contractor, Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors:
a) Comply with requirements for Members to obtain
appointments for routine care, Urgent Care, routine specialty
referral appointments, prenatal care, Children’s preventive
periodic health assessments, and adult Initial Health
Appointments (IHAs) in accordance with W&I section 14197,
and 28 CCR section 1300.67.2.2:
[[page 352]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 352 of 642
i. Urgent Care appointment for services that do not
require Prior Authorization within 48 hours of a
request;
ii. Urgent Care appointment for services that do require
Prior Authorization within 96 hours of a request;
iii. Non-urgent appointments for Primary Care within ten
(10) business days of request;
iv. Non-urgent appointments with Specialists within 15
business days of request;
v. Non-urgent appointment with a non-physician mental
health Provider with ten (10) business days of
request;
vi. Non-urgent appointment for ancillary services for the
diagnosis or treatment of injury, or illness within 15
business days of request;
vii. Availability of LTC Providers for the following
counties: Alameda, Contra Costa, Los Angeles,
Orange, Sacramento, San Diego, San Francisco, San
Mateo, and Santa Clara within five (5) business days
of request;
viii. Availability of LTC Providers for the following
counties: Marin, Placer, Riverside, San Joaquin,
Santa Cruz, Solano, Sonoma, Stanislaus, and
Ventura within seven (7) business days of request;
and
ix. Availability of LTC Providers for the following
counties: Alpine, Amador, Butte, Calaveras, Colusa,
Del Norte, El Dorado, Fresno, Glenn, Humboldt,
Imperial, Inyo, Kern, Kings, Lake, Lassen, Madera,
Mariposa, Mendocino, Merced, Modoc, Mono,
Monterey, Napa, Nevada, Plumas, San Benito, San
Bernardino, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Shasta,
Sierra, Siskiyou, Sutter, Tehama, Trinity, Tulare,
Tuolumne, Yolo, and Yuba within 14 business days of
request.
b) Offer Members appointments for Covered Services within a
time frame appropriate for their health condition but no
[[page 353]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 353 of 642
longer than the appointment timeframes set forth in 28 CCR
section 1300.67.2.2, unless the Member’s preference is to
wait for a later appointment from a specific Network
Provider. The applicable waiting time for a particular
appointment may be extended if the following conditions are
met:
i. The Member’s Medical Record notes that waiting will
not have a detrimental impact on the Member’s
health, as determined by the referring or treating
licensed health care Provider, or by the health
professional providing triage or screening services,
who is acting within the scope of their practice
c
onsistent with professionally recognized standards of
practice;
ii. The Provider’s decision to extend the applicable
waiting time is noted in the Member’s Medical Record
and made available to DHCS upon request; and
iii. Contractor ensures that the Member receives notice
of the Provider’s decision to extend the applicable
waiting time with an explanation of the Member’s right
to file a Grievance disputing the extension.
c) Contractor must provide the appointment time standards to
Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors, and monitor appointment waiting times in
Network Providers’ offices pursuant to 42 CFR section
438.206, W&I section 14197, and 28 CCR section
1300.67.2.2. Contractor must also ensure that Network
Providers comply with requirements for follow up on missed
appointments;
d) Offer hours of operation to Members that are no less than
the hours of operation offered to non-Medi Cal patients, or to
Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service (FFS) beneficiaries if the Network
Provider serves only Medi-Cal beneficiaries; and
e) Maintain procedures for triaging Members' telephone calls,
providing telephone medical advice, and accessing
telephone interpreters 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
3) During normal business hours, the waiting time for a Member to
speak by telephone with Contractor’s customer service
representative must not exceed ten minutes.
[[page 354]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 354 of 642
4) Contractor must ensure its customer service representatives have
knowledge and competency to assist in resolving Members’
questions and concerns.
5) Contractor must have a medical director or licensed Physician
acting on behalf of Contractor’s medical director, who is available
24 hours a day, seven days a week to assist with access issues.
6) Contractor must ensure that its Network Providers, Subcontractors,
and Downstream Subcontractors participate in all timely access
survey(s) and Network adequacy activities conducted by DHCS or
its contractors. Contractor entering into new or amended Network
Provider or Subcontractor agreements with Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and/or Downstream Subcontractors must include
language requiring Provider participation.
B. Time or Distance
1) Contractor must ensure that its Network Providers, Subcontractors,
and Downstream Subcontractors meet the time or distance
standards for adult and pediatric PCPs, adult and pediatric core
Specialists, OB/GYN primary and specialty care, adult and pediatric
mental outpatient health Providers, and hospitals, as required by
W&I section 14197(b) and (c).
2) Contractor must either exhaust all other reasonable options for
contracting with Providers, including offering to contract with
Providers in adjoining Service Areas, or provide evidence to DHCS
demonstrating that its delivery structure is capable of delivering the
appropriate level of care and access as required by W&I section
14197 prior to submitting an Alternate Access Standard (AAS)
request to DHCS.
3) If Contractor is unable to comply with the time or distance
standards set forth in W&I section 14197, Contractor must submit
an AAS request to DHCS for review and approval in accordance
with APL 23-001, detailing how it intends to arrange for Covered
Services in accordance with W&I section 14197(e)(3).
4) Contractor must publish on its website its approved AAS requests
in accordance with W&I section 14197.04.
5) If Contractor has received an AAS approval from DHCS for a core
Specialist, upon a Member’s request, Contractor must assist the
Member in obtaining an appointment with the appropriate core
[[page 355]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 355 of 642
Specialist in accordance with W&I section 14197.04. Contractor
must either make its best effort to establish a Member-specific case
agreement with an out-of-Network Provider or arrange for an
appointment with a Network Provider in an adjoining Service Area
within the time or distance standards in accordance with W&I
section 14197.04. If needed, Contractor must assist in arranging
transportation for the Member. Contractor must not be held liable
for fulfilling these requirements if either there is no core Specialist
within the time or distance standards of this Contract, or the core
Specialist has refused to contract in the previous 12 months.
6) Contractors that do not meet time or distance standards without the
use of an AAS request must provide documentation demonstrating
efforts to recruit new Providers to these areas. Contractor must
submit this documentation as part of the Network certification report
detailed in 5.2.13.
5.2.6 Access to Emergency Service Providers and Emergency Services
A. Contractor must have within its Network, at a minimum, a designated
Emergency Services facility, providing care 24 hours a day, seven days a
week. This designated Emergency Services facility must have one or
more Physicians and one nurse on duty in the facility at all times.
B. Contractor must ensure that Members with Emergency Medical Conditions
are seen on an emergency basis and that Emergency Services are
available and accessible within Contractor’s Service Area seven days a
week, 24 hours a day, in accordance with 42 USC sections 1395dd and
1396u-2(b)(2), 42 CFR sections 438.114 and 438.206(c)(1)(iii), and 28
CCR 1300.67(g)(1).
C Contractor must reimburse the costs of Emergency Services without Prior
Authorization pursuant to 42 USC section 1395dd, 42 CFR section
438.114, 28 CCR section 1300.67(g), and 22 CCR section 53216 and
53855.
D. Contractor must have a medical director or licensed physician acting on
behalf of Contractor’s medical director, who is available 24 hours a day,
seven days a week to authorize Medically Necessary Post-Stabilization
Care Services, to respond to hospital inquiries within 30 minutes, and to
coordinate the transfer of a Member whose Emergency Medical Condition
is stabilized.
E. Contractor must ensure that Members have timely access to Medically
Necessary follow-up care including but not limited to appropriate referrals
to Primary Care, Behavioral Health Services, and social services for
[[page 356]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 356 of 642
Members who have been screened in the emergency room and do not
require Emergency Services.
F. Contractor must coordinate access to Emergency Services in accordance
with Contractor’s DHCS-approved emergency department protocol, as
required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 3.2 (Provider Relations).
G. If Contractor delegates its Emergency Services and Post-Stabilization
Care Services oversight obligations to Network Providers, Subcontractors,
or Downstream Subcontractors, it must ensure a licensed physician is
available seven days a week, 24 hours a day, to authorize Medically
Necessary Post-Stabilization Care Services and coordinate the transfer of
stabilized Members in an emergency department to an appropriate
Network Provider, if necessary, as required under Health & Safety Code
(H&S) section 1371.4.
5.2.7 Out-of-Network Access
A. Contractor must authorize and arrange for out-of-Network access in the
following circumstances:
1) Contractor does not meet Network adequacy requirements set forth
in W&I section 14197;
2) Contractor does not have an AAS approved by DHCS and fails to
meet the Network adequacy standards set forth in W&I section
14197;
3) Contractor fails to comply with the requirements for timely access to
appointments; or
4) Contractor must arrange for access to out-of-Network LTC when
Medically Necessary for a Member in cases where Contractor does
not have in-Network LTC capacity.
B. Contractor must authorize and arrange for services from out-of-Network
Providers when the Provider type is unavailable within the Network but
available in an adjoining county(ies). If there is no Network Provider in the
adjoining county(ies), Contractor must authorize out-of-Network services
to the most appropriate Provider as close to time or distance requirements
as possible.
C. Contractor must provide Non-Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT)
or Non-Medical Transportation (NMT) to the out-of-Network Provider, at
no cost to the Member. Contractor must inform Members of their right to
[[page 357]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 357 of 642
obtain NEMT or NMT services to access out-of-Network services in
accordance with W&I section 14197.04.
D. Contractor must adequately and timely cover and reimburse Providers for
out-of-Network services rendered to its Members for as long as Contractor
is unable to provide these services in its Network. Contractor must ensure
that the Member is not charged for services furnished out-of-Network.
Contractor must also ensure that Members are not balance-billed for any
service provided out-of-Network.
5.2.8 Specific Requirements for Access to Programs and Covered Services
A. Family Planning Services
1) Contractor must ensure Members have access to family planning
services through any available family planning Provider regardless
of whether they are in or out of the Network, without requiring Prior
Authorization. Contractor must provide family planning services in a
manner that ensures Members have the freedom to choose their
preferred method of family planning consistent with 42 CFR section
441.20.
2) Contractor must not restrict a Member’s Provider choice for family
planning services covered pursuant to 42 CFR section 431.51(a)(3)
and W&I section 14132.07.
3) Contractor’s Member Handbook must inform Members of their right
to access any qualified family planning Provider regardless of
whether the Provider is in the Network and without Prior
Authorization, in addition to requirements included in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 5.1 (Member Services).
4) Contractor must ensure that Members are advised of their options
for all contraceptive methods to allow them to provide informed
consent for their choice of contraceptive method, including
sterilization, as required by 22 CCR sections 51305.1 and 51305.3.
Members of childbearing age may access the following services
from an out-of-Network family planning Provider to temporarily or
permanently prevent or delay pregnancy:
a) Health education and counseling necessary to make
informed choices and understand contraceptive methods;
b) Limited history and physical examination;
[[page 358]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 358 of 642
c) Laboratory tests if medically indicated as part of the
decision-making process in choice of contraceptive methods,
except pap smears if Contractor provides pap smears to
meet the United States Preventive Services Taskforce
(USPSTF) guidelines,
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org;
d) Follow-up care for complications associated with
contraceptive methods provided or prescribed by the family
planning Provider;
e) Provision of contraceptive pills, devices, and supplies;
f) Tubal ligation;
g) Vasectomies; and
h) Pregnancy testing and counseling.
B. Sexually Transmitted Diseases
Contractor must ensure Members have access to Sexually Transmitted
Disease (STD) services from any Network Provider or out-of-Network
Provider without requiring Prior Authorization or referral. Contractor must
allow Members to access out-of-Network STD services through Local
Health Department (LHD) clinics, family planning clinics, or through other
community STD service Providers.
C. HIV Testing and Counseling
Contractor must ensure that Members have access to confidential Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) counseling and testing services from any
Network Provider or out-of-Network Provider without requiring Prior
Authorization.
D. Minor Consent Services
Contractor must ensure access to Minor Consent Services for Members
over the age of 12 from any Network Provider or out-of-Network Provider
without requiring Prior Authorization. Contractor must ensure Members
are informed of the availability of these services without Prior
Authorization. Minors over the age of 12 do not need parent, legal
guardian, or Authorized Representative (AR) consent to access these
services, and Contractor, Network Providers, Subcontractors, or
Downstream Subcontractors are prohibited from disclosing any
information relating to Minor Consent Services without the express
[[page 359]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 359 of 642
consent of the minor Member. Minor Consent Services include treatment
for the following:
1) Under Age 12
a) Pregnancy and pregnancy related services
b) Family planning services
c) Sexual assault services
2) Age 12 and Older
a) Pregnancy and pregnancy related services
b) Family planning services
c) Sexual assault services
d) Infectious, contagious, or communicable disease diagnosis
and treatment
e) Sexually transmitted diseases prevention (or infections),
diagnosis, and treatment
f) Drug and alcohol abuse treatment and counseling
g) Outpatient mental health treatment and counseling.
Minors may obtain outpatient mental health services, if in the
opinion of the attending professional person determines that
the minor is mature enough to participate intelligently in their
health care pursuant to Family Code section 6924.
h) Intimate partner violence
E. Immunizations
Members may access LHD clinics for immunizations regardless of
whether the LHD is in the Network or out-of-Network, without Prior
Authorization. Upon request, Contractor must provide updated information
on the status of the Member’s immunizations to the LHD clinic. Contractor
must reimburse LHD clinics that provide immunizations to its Members
after receipt of claims and supporting immunization records.
F. Indian Health Care Providers
[[page 360]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 360 of 642
Contractor must ensure qualified Members have timely access to IHCPs
within its Network, where available, as required by 42 USC section 1396j.
IHCPs, whether in the Network or out-of-Network, can provide referrals
directly to Network Providers without requiring a referral from a Network
PCP or Prior Authorization in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.14(b).
Contractor must also allow for access to an out-of-Network IHCPs without
requiring a referral from a Network PCP or Prior Authorization in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.14(b).
G. Certified Nurse Midwife and Nurse Practitioner Services
1) Contractor must ensure that its Members have access to CNM
services as required by 42 United States Code (USC) section
1396d(a)(17) and 22 CCR section 51345.
2) Contractor must ensure its Members have access to Nurse
Practitioner (NP) services as required in 22 CCR section 51345.1.
3) Contractor must inform its Members that they have a right to obtain
out-of-Network CNM services if CNM services are not available in-
Network.
H. Services to Which Network Provider, Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor Has a Moral Objection
1) If a Network Provider, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor
has religious or ethical objections to perform or otherwise support
the provision of Covered Services, Contractor must timely arrange
for, coordinate, and ensure the Member receives the Covered
Services through referrals to a Provider that has no religious or
ethical objection to performing the requested service or procedure,
at no additional expense to DHCS or the Member.
2) Contractor’s Member Handbook must identify services to which a
Network Provider, Subcontractor, or Downstream Subcontractor
may have a moral objection and explain that the Member has a
right to obtain such services from another Provider. Contractor
must also inform the Member that it will assist the Member in
locating a Network Provider who will perform the service or
procedure.
I. Federally Qualified Health Center, Rural Health Clinic, and Freestanding
Birthing Center Services
[[page 361]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 361 of 642
Contractor must meet federal requirements for access to a FQHC, RHC,
and FBC services consistent with 42 USC section 1396b(m) and Medicaid
State Health Official Letter #16-006.
J. Community Based Adult Services
Contractor must provide Members with access to CBAS as set forth in the
California Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) Special Terms
and Conditions, or as set forth in any subsequent demonstration
amendment or renewal, or successor demonstration, waiver, or other
Medicaid authority. Without limitation, Contractor must do the following:
1) Provide and coordinate the provision of unbundled CBAS services
for affected CBAS recipients as needed for continuity of care if
there is a 5 percent reduction in CBAS Provider capacity in a
county within the Service Area relative to the capacity that existed
on April 1, 2012; and
2) Arrange Medically Necessary Covered Services for Members with
similar clinical conditions as CBAS recipients if there is insufficient
CBAS Provider capacity in a county in which ADHC was available
prior to April 1, 2012, and coordinate their access to community
resources to assist them to remain in the community.
5.2.9 Network and Access Changes to Covered Services
A. DHCS Notification Requirements
1) Contractor must provide notification to DHCS immediately upon
discovery of a Network Provider initiated termination or at least 60
calendar days before any change occurs in the availability or
location of services Contractor’s Covered Services. Contractor
must provide this notice if the change impacts more than 2,000
Members or impacts Contractor’s ability to meet Network adequacy
standards in accordance with APL 21-003. In the event of an
emergency or other unforeseeable circumstance, Contractor must
notify DHCS of the change in the availability or location of services
as expeditiously as possible.
2) Contractor must provide notification to DHCS immediately, or within
10 calendar days of learning of a Provider’s exclusionary status
from any database or list included in APL 21-003.
3) Contractor must notify DHCS when it is unable to contract with a
certified CBAS Provider or upon termination of a CBAS Network
Provider Agreement. If Contractor and the CBAS Provider cannot
[[page 362]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 362 of 642
come to an agreement on terms, Contractor must notify DHCS
within five Working Days of Contractor’s decision to exclude the
CBAS Provider from its Network. DHCS may attempt to resolve the
contracting issue when appropriate.
4) In accordance with APL 21-003, Contractor must notify DHCS
within 60 calendar days of termination of a LTC Network Provider
or immediately if the termination is a result of the LTC Network
Provider having been decertified by the California Department of
Public Health (CDPH). DHCS will attempt to resolve the contracting
issue when appropriate. If termination of a LTC Network Provider
Agreement is for a cause related to Quality of Care or patient safety
concerns, Contactor may expedite termination of the LTC Network
Provider Agreement and transfer Members to an appropriate,
contracted LTC Provider in an expeditious manner. DHCS must be
notified of the termination within 72 hours of said termination.
Contractor must not continue to assign or refer Members to a LTC
Network Provider during the 60 calendar days between notifying
DHCS and the termination effective date.
B. Member Notification Requirements
1) Contractor must ensure Members are notified in writing of any
changes in the availability or location of Covered Services, of any
termination of a Network Provider, Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor either 30 calendar days prior to the effective date of
the contract termination or at least 15 calendar days after receipt of
issuance of the termination notice, whichever is longer, unless
directed by DHCS. The notification must be provided to each
Member who received Primary Care from, or was seen on a regular
basis by, the terminated Provider. This notification must also be
submitted to DHCS in writing for approval before its release.
2) Contractor must obtain DHCS approval before sending a notice of
termination to its Members no later than 60 calendar days prior to
the effective date of the termination. Contractor may use a member
notice template previously approved by DHCS. Any changes from
the approved template must be submitted to DHCS 60 calendar
days prior to the effective date of the termination for review and
approval before mailing the notice. In the event of an emergency or
other unforeseeable circumstance, Contractor must provide notice
of the emergency or other unforeseeable circumstance to DHCS as
soon as possible.
5.2.10 Access Rights
[[page 363]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 363 of 642
A. Equal Access for Linguistic Services
Contractor must ensure equal access to the provision of high quality
interpreter and linguistic services for LEP Members and Potential
Members, and for Members and Potential Members with disabilities, in
compliance with federal and State law, and APL 21-004.
B. Linguistic Services
1) Contractor must comply with W&I section 14029.91 and ensure that
all monolingual, non-English-speaking, or LEP Members and
Potential Members receive 24-hour interpreter services at all key
points of contact, as defined in Paragraph B.4) of this provision,
either through interpreters, telephone language services, or other
legally compliant electronic options.
2) Contractor must ensure that any lack of interpreter services does
not impede or delay a Member's timely access to care.
3) Contractor must comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964
and 42 CFR section 438.10(d) and have the capacity to provide, at
minimum, the following linguistic services at no cost to Members or
Potential Members:
a) Oral interpreters, sign language Providers, or bilingual
Network Providers, Network Provider staff, Subcontractors,
and Downstream Subcontractors at all key points of contact.
These services must be provided in all languages spoken by
Medi-Cal Members and Potential Members and not limited to
those that speak the threshold or concentration standards
languages.
b) Full and immediate translation of written materials pursuant
to 42 CFR sections 438.10(d)(3), 438.404(a), and
438.408(d); W&I section 14029.91; and 22 CCR section
53876 for LEP Members and Potential Members who speak
Threshold or Concentration Standard Languages, fully
translated Member Information, including: the Member
Handbook, Provider Directory, welcome packets, Marketing
information, Member rights information, form letters and
individual notices, including Notice of Action (NOA) letters,
all notices related to Grievances and Appeals including
Grievance and Appeal acknowledgement and resolution
letters, and any other materials as required by Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and APL 21-004;
[[page 364]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 364 of 642
c) Referrals to culturally and linguistically appropriate
community service programs; and
d) Auxiliary Aids such as Telephone Typewriters (TTY)/
Telecommunication Devices for the Deaf (TDD), qualified
interpreters including American Sign Language interpreters,
and information in alternative formats including Braille, large
print text (20 point font or larger), audio, and electronic
formats, in accordance with written informing materials in
alternative formats, selected by the Member, as specified in
APL 21-004 and APL 22-002.
4) Key points of contact include:
a) Medical care settings, such as telephone, advice and Urgent
Care transactions, and outpatient Encounters with Providers;
and
b) Non-medical care settings, such as Member services,
orientations, and appointment scheduling.
C. Access for Persons with Disabilities
Contractor must comply with the requirements of Titles II and III of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 USC sections 12131 et seq.
and 12181 et seq.), section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (42
USC section 18116), sections 504 and 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of
1973 (29 USC sections 794 and 794d), Government Code (GC) sections
7405 and 11135, and all applicable implementing regulations, and must
ensure access for people with disabilities including, without limitation,
accessible web and electronic content, ramps, elevators, accessible
restrooms, designated parking spaces, and accessible drinking water.
5.2.11 Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees
A. Cultural and Linguistic Program
1) Contractor must develop and implement policies and procedures
for assessing the performance of its employees, contracted staff,
and other individuals who provide linguistic services, addressing
any identified gaps in the provision of cultural and linguistic services
by Contractor’s staff, and for overall monitoring and evaluation of its
cultural and linguistic services programs.
2) Contractor must have in place and continually monitor, improve,
and evaluate cultural and linguistic services that support the
[[page 365]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 365 of 642
delivery of Covered Services to Members. Contractor must ensure
it has proper policies and procedures in place to provide
appropriate cultural and linguistic services for all of its Members.
3) Contractor must take immediate action to improve the delivery of
culturally and linguistically appropriate services when deficiencies
are noted.
4) Contractor must be active in recruiting and retaining culturally and
linguistically competent Providers that reflect the needs of the Medi-
Cal population in Contractor’s Service Area.
5) Contractor must have a cultural and linguistic services program, as
required by 22 CCR section 53876, that incorporates all
requirements of applicable federal and State law, including without
limitation those requirements cited in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.10 (Access Rights), 42 CFR section 438.206(c)(2),
22 CCR sections 51202.5 and 51309.5(a), and 28 CCR sections
1300.67.04(c)(2)(A) - (B) and 1300.67.04(c)(2)(G)(v) - (c)(4).
Contractor must ensure immediate translation of all critical Member
Information as required by 42 CFR sections 438.10, 438.404(a),
and 438.408(d), and W&I section 14029.91.
6) Contractor must review and update its cultural and linguistic
services programs to align with the Population Needs Assessment
(PNA) implementation and subsequent findings. Contractor must
ensure its Network Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors cultural and Health Equity linguistic services
programs also align with the PNA.
7) Contractor must implement and maintain a written description of its
cultural and linguistic services program which must include, at a
minimum, the following:
a) Its organizational commitment to deliver culturally and
linguistically appropriate health care services;
b) Services that comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964 (42 USC section 2000e et seq.), section 1557 of the
Affordable Care Act of 2010 (42 USC section 18116), 42
CFR section 438.10, APL 21-004, and Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 5.2.10 (Access Rights).
c) Use of national standards for Culturally and Linguistically
Appropriate Services (CLAS) for reference;
[[page 366]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 366 of 642
d) An organizational chart showing the key staff with overall
responsibility for cultural and linguistic services programs;
e) A narrative explaining the organizational chart and
describing the oversight and direction to the Community
Advisory Committee (CAC), requirements for Contractor’s
support staff, and reporting relationships. Qualifications of
Contractor’s staff, including appropriate education,
experience, and training must also be included;
f) The role of the PNA to inform Contractor’s cultural and
linguistic services program priorities in compliance with
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.2 (Population
Needs Assessment);
g) The implementation and maintenance of annual sensitivity,
diversity, communication skills, Health Equity, and cultural
competency/humility training and related trainings (e.g.,
providing gender affirming care) for employees and
contracted staff (clinical and non-clinical), as determined by
Section C of this provision, Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Training; and
h) Contractor’s administrative oversight and compliance
monitoring of the cultural and linguistic services program and
requirements for the delivery of culturally and linguistically
appropriate health care services.
B. Linguistic Capability of Employees and Contracted Staff
Contractor must assess and track the linguistic capability of its interpreters
or bilingual staff and contracted staff (clinical and non-clinical). Contractor
must implement a system to provide adequate training regarding its
language assistance programs to all employees and contracted staff who
have routine contact with LEP Members or Potential Members and
systematically address any identified gaps in Contractor’s ability to
address Members’ cultural and linguistic needs. The training must include
instruction on:
1) Contractor's policies and procedures for language assistance;
2) How to work effectively with LEP Members and Potential Members;
3) How to work effectively with interpreters in person and through
video, telephone, and other media; and,
[[page 367]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 367 of 642
4) Understanding the cultural diversity of Members and Potential
Members, and sensitivity to cultural differences relevant to delivery
of health care interpretation services, in accordance with Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11 (Cultural and Linguistic Programs
and Committees).
C. Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Training
Contractor must provide annual sensitivity, diversity, cultural
competency/humility and Health Equity training for its employees and
contracted staff as detailed in APL 23-025. Training must consider
structural and institutional racism and Health Inequities and their impact
on Members, staff, Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors. Contractor must ensure Network Providers and Allied
Health Personnel receive pertinent information regarding the PNA findings
and the identified targeted strategies. Contractor must use the most
appropriate communication method(s) to assure the information can be
accessed and understood. The training must include the following
requirements:
1) Promote access and delivery of services in a culturally competent
manner to all Members and Potential Members, regardless of sex,
race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, creed, ethnic group
identification, age, mental disability, physical disability, medical
condition, genetic information, health status, marital status, gender,
gender identity, sexual orientation, or identification with any other
persons or groups defined in Penal Code section 422.56; and
2) Information about the Health Inequities and identified cultural
groups in Contractor’s Service Area which includes but is not
limited to: the groups’ beliefs about illness and health; need for
gender affirming care; methods of interacting with Providers and
the health care structure; traditional home remedies that may
impact what the Provider recommends to treat the patient; and
language and literacy needs.
D. Community Engagement
Contractor must develop a policy and procedure for a Member and family
engagement strategy that involves Members and their families as partners
in the delivery of Covered Services. This includes, but is not limited to the
following:
1) Maintaining an organizational leadership commitment to engaging
with Members and their families in the delivery of care;
[[page 368]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 368 of 642
2) Routinely engaging with Members and families through focus
groups, listening sessions, surveys and/or interviews and
incorporating results into policies and decision-making, as
described in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.7.A (Quality
Improvement and Health Equity Annual Plan);
3) Developing processes and accountability for incorporating Member
and family input into policies and decision-making;
4) Developing processes to measures and/or monitor the impact of
Member and family input into policies and decision-making;
5) Developing processes to share with Members and families how
their input impacts policies and decision-making;
6) Conducting consumer surveys and incorporating results in Quality
Improvement (QI) and Health Equity activities as described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.9.C (Consumer
Satisfaction Survey);
7) Partnering with community based organizations to cultivate
Member and family engagement;
8) Maintaining a CAC whose composition reflects Contractor’s
Member population and whose input is actively utilized in policies
and decision-making by Contractor, as outlined below in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11.E. (Cultural and Linguistic
Programs and Committees).
E. Community Advisory Committee (CAC)
1) Contractor must have a diverse CAC pursuant to 22 CCR section
53876(c), comprised primarily of Contractor's Members, as part of
Contractor’s implementation and maintenance of Member and
community engagement with stakeholders, community advocates,
traditional and Safety-Net Providers, and Members.
2) CAC Membership
a) Contractor must convene a CAC selection committee tasked
with selecting the members of the CAC. Contractor must
demonstrate a good faith effort to ensure that the CAC
selection committee is comprised of a representative sample
of each of the persons below to bring different perspectives,
ideas, and views to the CAC:
[[page 369]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 369 of 642
i. Persons who sit on Contractor’s Governing Board,
which should include representation in the following
areas: Safety Net Providers including FQHCs,
Behavioral Health Providers, Regional Centers (RC),
Local Education Agencies (LEAs), dental Providers,
IHCPs, and Home and Community-Based Service
(HCBS) program Providers; and
ii. Persons and community-based organizations who are
representatives of each county within Contractor’s
Service Area adjusting for changes in membership
diversity.
b) The CAC selection committee must ensure the CAC
membership reflects the general Medi-Cal Member
population in Contractor’s Service Area, including
representatives from IHCPs, and adolescents and/or parents
and/or caregivers of Children, including foster youth, as
appropriate and be modified as the population changes to
ensure that Contractor’s community is represented and
engaged. The CAC selection committee must make good
faith efforts to include representatives from diverse and hard-
to-reach populations on the CAC, with a specific emphasis
on persons who are representative of or serving populations
that experience Health Disparities such as individuals with
diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds, genders, gender
identity, and sexual orientation and physical disabilities.
c) Contractor’s CAC selection committee must select all of its
CAC members promptly no later than 180 calendar days
from the effective date of this contract.
d) Should a CAC member resign, is asked to resign, or is
otherwise unable to serve on the CAC, Contractor must
make its best effort to promptly replace the vacant seat
within 60 calendar days of the CAC vacancy.
e) Contractor must designate a CAC coordinator and maintain
a written job description detailing the CAC coordinator’s
responsibilities, which must include having responsibility for
managing the operations of the CAC in compliance with all
statutory, rule, and contract requirements, including, but not
limited to:
[[page 370]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 370 of 642
i. Ensuring CAC meetings are scheduled and
committee agendas are developed with the input of
CAC members;
ii. Maintaining CAC membership, including outreach,
recruitment, and onboarding of new members, that is
adequate to carry out the duties of the CAC;
iii. Actively facilitating communications and connections
between the CAC and Contractor leadership,
including ensuring CAC members are informed of
Contractor decisions relevant to the work of the CAC;
iv. Ensuring that CAC meetings, including necessary
facilities, materials, and other components, are
accessible to all participants and that appropriate
accommodations are provided to allow all attending
the meeting, including, but not limited to, accessibility
for individuals with a disability or LEP Members to
effectively communicate and participate in CAC
meetings;
v. Ensuring compliance with all CAC reporting and
public posting requirements; and
vi. The CAC coordinator may be an employee of
Contractor, Subcontractor, or Downstream
Subcontractor. Contractor’s CAC coordinator must not
be a member of the CAC or a Member enrolled with
Contractor.
3) CAC Meetings
a) Contractor must hold its first regular CAC meeting promptly
after all initial CAC members have been selected by the
CAC selection committee and at least quarterly thereafter.
b) Contractor must make the regularly scheduled CAC
meetings open to the public, posting meeting information
publicly on Contractor’s website in a centralized location 30
calendar days prior to the meeting, and in no event later than
72 hours prior to the meeting.
c) Contractor must provide a location for CAC meetings and all
necessary tools and materials to run meetings, including, but
not limited to, making the meeting accessible to all
[[page 371]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 371 of 642
participants and providing accommodations to allow all
individuals to attend and participate in the meetings.
d) CAC must draft written minutes of each of its meetings and
the associated discussions. All minutes must be posted on
Contractor’s website and submitted to DHCS no later than
45 calendar days after each meeting. Contractor must retain
the minutes for no less than ten years and provided to
DHCS, upon request.
e) Contractor must ensure that CAC members are supported in
their roles on the CAC, including but not limited to providing
resources to educate CAC members to ensure they are able
to effectively participate in CAC meetings, providing
transportation to CAC meetings, arranging childcare as
necessary, and scheduling meetings at times and in formats
to ensure the highest CAC member participation possible.
f) Contractor must demonstrate that CAC input is considered in
annual reviews and updates to relevant policies and
procedures, including CAC input pursuant to Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.11.E. (Cultural and Linguistic
Programs and Committees) that is relevant to policies and
procedures affecting quality and Health Equity. Contractor
must provide a feedback loop to inform CAC members how
their input has been incorporated.
4) Duties of the CAC
The CAC must carry out the duties as set forth in this Contract.
Such duties include, but are not limited to:
a) Identifying and advocating for Preventive Care practices to
be utilized by Contractor;
b) Contractor must ensure that the CAC is included and
involved in developing and updating cultural and linguistic
policy and procedure decisions including those related to QI,
education, and operational and cultural competency issues
affecting groups who speak a primary language other than
English. The CAC may also advise on necessary Member or
Provider targeted services, programs, and trainings;
c) The CAC must provide and make recommendations to
Contractor regarding the cultural appropriateness of
communications, partnerships, and services;
[[page 372]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 372 of 642
d) Contractor must engage their CAC as a part of their
participation in LHJs’ CHA/CHIP process, as defined further
in the PHM Policy Guide;
e) Contractor must provide sufficient resources for the CAC to
support the required CAC activities outlined above, including
supporting the CAC in engagement strategies such as
consumer listening sessions, focus groups, and/or surveys;
and
f) The CAC must provide input and advice, including, but not
limited to, the following:
i. Culturally appropriate service or program design;
ii. Priorities for health education and outreach program;
iii. Member satisfaction survey results;
iv. Findings of the PNA;
v. Plan Marketing Materials and campaigns.
vi. Communication of needs for Network development
and assessment;
vii. Community resources and information;
viii. Population Health Management;
ix. Quality;
x. Health Delivery Systems Reforms to improve health
outcomes;
xi. Carved Out Services;
xii. Coordination of Care; and
xiii. Health Equity;
xiv. Accessibility of Services
5) Contractor’s Annual CAC Demographic Report
[[page 373]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 373 of 642
To ensure Contractor’s CAC membership is representative of the
Communities in Contractor’s Service Area, Contractor must
complete and submit to DHCS annually an Annual CAC Member
Demographic Report by April 1 of each year. The Annual CAC
Member Demographic Report must include descriptions of all of the
following:
a) The demographic composition of CAC membership;
b) How Contractor defines the demographics and diversity of its
Members and Potential Members within Contractor’s Service
Area;
c) The data sources relied upon by Contractor to validate that
its CAC membership aligns with Contractor’s Member
demographics;
d) Barriers to and challenges in meeting or increasing
alignment between CAC’s membership with the
demographics of the Members within Contractor’s Service
Area;
e) Ongoing, updated and new efforts and strategies undertaken
in CAC membership recruitment to address the barriers and
challenges to achieving alignment between CAC
membership with the demographics of the Members within
Contractor’s Service Area; and
f) A description of the CAC’s ongoing role and impact in
decision-making about Health Equity, health-related
initiatives, cultural and linguistic services, resource
allocation, and other community-based initiatives, including
examples of how CAC input impacted and shaped
Contractor initiatives and/or policies.
5.2.12 Continuity of Care for Seniors and Persons with Disabilities
A. For newly enrolled Seniors and Persons with Disabilities (SPD) who
request continuity of care, Contractor must provide continued access for
up to 12 months to an out-of-Network Provider with whom the SPD
Member has an ongoing relationship, as long as Contractor has no Quality
of Care issues with the Provider and the Provider will accept either
Contractor’s or the Medi-Cal FFS Rates, whichever is higher, pursuant to
W&I section 14182(b)(13) - (14). Contractor must use Medi-Cal FFS
utilization data from DHCS to confirm that the SPD Member has an
ongoing relationship with the Provider.
[[page 374]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 374 of 642
B. Contractor must allow all Members to request continuity of care in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.62 and APL 23-022.
C. Contractor must provide for the completion of Covered Services at the
request of a Member in accordance with H&S section 1373.96. All
Members with pre-existing Provider relationships who make a continuity of
care request must be given the option to continue treatment for up to 12
months with an out-of-Network Provider, if the following criteria are met:
1) The Member has seen the out-of-Network Provider at least once
within the 12 months before Enrollment with Contractor;
2) The out-of-Network Provider accepts Contractor’s rate offered in
accordance with H&S section 1373.96(d)(2) or (e)(2); and
3) The out-of-Network Provider meets Contractor’s applicable
professional standards and has no disqualifying Quality of Care
issues.
D. Contractor must conduct Person-Centered Planning for SPD Members as
follows:
1) Upon the Enrollment of a SPD Member, Contractor must provide,
or ensure the provision of, Person-Centered Planning and
treatment approaches that are collaborative and responsive to the
SPD Member’s continuing health care needs.
2) Contractor must include identifying each SPD Member’s
preferences and choices regarding treatments and services, and
abilities.
3) Contractor must allow or ensure the participation of the SPD
Member, and any family, friends, and professionals of their
choosing, to participate fully in any discussion or decisions
regarding treatments and services.
4) Contractor must ensure that SPD Members receive all necessary
information regarding treatment and services so that they may
make an informed choice.
5) Complex Case Management services for SPD Members must
include the concepts of Person-Centered Planning.
E. Contractor must ensure the provision of Discharge Planning when a SPD
Member is admitted to a hospital or institution and continuation into the
[[page 375]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 375 of 642
post-discharge period. Discharge Planning must include ensuring that
necessary care, services, and supports are in place in the community for
the SPD Member once they are discharged from a hospital or institution,
including scheduling an outpatient appointment and/or conducting follow-
up with the SPD Member and/or caregiver. The minimum criteria for a
Discharge Planning checklist must include:
1) Documentation of pre-admission status, including living
arrangements, physical and mental function, social support,
Durable Medical Equipment (DME), and other services received.
2) Documentation of pre-discharge factors, including an
understanding of the medical condition by the SPD Member or an
AR of the SPD Member as applicable, physical and mental
function, financial resources, and social supports.
3) Services needed after discharge, the type of placement preferred
by the SPD Member or their AR and hospital/institution, type of
placement agreed to by the SPD Member or their AR, the specific
agency or home recommended by the hospital, the specific agency
or home agreed to by the SPD Member or their AR, and the pre-
discharge counseling that is recommended.
4) Summary of the nature and outcome of the SPD Member’s, or their
AR’s, involvement in the Discharge Planning process, anticipated
problems in implementing post-discharge plans, and further action
contemplated by the hospital or institution.
5.2.13 Network Reports
A. Network Certification Report
1) Contractor must submit its Network certification report to DHCS.
The report must demonstrate Contractor’s capacity to serve the
current and expected membership for its Service Area in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.207(b), W&I section
14197(f)(1), and APL 23-001.
2) Contractor must demonstrate good faith compliance with
contracting and referral requirements with certain cancer centers in
accordance with W&I section 14197.45.
3) Contractor must demonstrate how it will arrange for Covered
Services to Members through the use of NEMT, NMT, and
Telehealth if Contractor does not meet time or distance standards
[[page 376]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 376 of 642
for adult and pediatric PCPs, core Specialist and outpatient mental
health Providers in accordance with W&I section 14197(f)(2).
4) Contractor must submit Network certification in accordance with the
requirements placed upon DHCS pursuant to 42 CFR section
438.66(e).
Contractor must submit its Network certification report as
outlined in APL 23-001. As part of the Network certification report,
Contractor must provide documentation demonstrating efforts to
recruit new Providers to areas that do not meet time or distance
standards without the use of an AAS request.
B. Periodic Reporting Requirements
1) Contractor must report to DHCS any time there is a Significant
Change to Contractor’s Network that affects Network capacity and
Contractor’s ability to provide health care services, such as the
following:
a) Change in Covered Services or benefits;
b) Change in geographic Service Area;
c) Change in the composition of, or the payments to, its
Network Providers, Subcontractors, or Downstream
Subcontractors; or
d) Enrollment of a new population.
2) Contractor must provide supporting documentation detailing any
Significant Change to DHCS. DHCS will determine what
information Contractor must provide after Contractor reports a
Significant Change to its Network pursuant to 42 CFR section
438.207.
C. Network Change Report
1) Contractor must submit to DHCS, in a format specified by DHCS, a
report summarizing changes in the Network.
2) Contractor must submit the report 30 calendar days following the
end of the reporting quarter.
D. Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Network Certification
Report
[[page 377]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 377 of 642
1) Contractor must develop, implement, and maintain a process to
annually certify the Network(s) of its Subcontractor(s) and
Downstream Subcontractor(s) that provide Medi-Cal Covered
Services for compliance with Network Ratios set forth in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.4 (Network Ratios), Network
Adequacy Standards set forth in Subsection 5.2.5 (Network
Adequacy Standards), and Network Composition requirements set
forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.3 (Network
Composition) of this Contract in accordance with APL 23-006.
2) Contractor must submit complete and accurate Network Provider
Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Network Provider
Data to confirm its Subcontractor Network(s) is compliant with all
applicable network adequacy requirements, as set forth in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.1.4 (Network Provider Data
Reporting).
3) Contactor must have a process in place to impose Corrective
Action and sanctions and report to DHCS when Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractors that provide Covered Services fail to
meet Network adequacy standards as set forth in APL 23-006.
Contractor must ensure all Members assigned to a Subcontractor
or Downstream Subcontractor Network that is under a Corrective
Action continue access to Medically Necessary Covered Services
within timely access standards and applicable time or distance
standards as set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.5
(Network Adequacy Standards) by supplementing the
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor Network until the
Corrective Action is resolved.
4) Contractor must submit Network certification in accordance with the
requirements placed upon DHCS pursuant to 42 CFR section
438.66(e). Contractor must submit the results of its Subcontractor
and Downstream Subcontractor Network Certification to DHCS in a
format specified by DHCS and post its submitted certification on its
website.
5.2.14 Site Review
A. General Requirement
1) Contractor must conduct Facility Site Reviews (FSR) and Medical
Record reviews, initially and every three years, on all PCP sites in
accordance with APL 22-017. Contractor must ensure that Network
Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors have
the capacity to provide Primary Care services, appropriate
[[page 378]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 378 of 642
Preventive Care services, coordination and continuity of care in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.207.
2) Contractor must ensure that Network Providers provide physical
access, reasonable accommodations, and accessible equipment
for Members with physical or mental disabilities. Contractor must
also conduct facility site physical accessibility reviews on PCP
sites, Provider sites which serve a high volume of SPD Members,
and all Provider sites including CBAS and ancillary service
Providers, in accordance with Policy Letter (PL) 12-006 and W&I
section 14182(b)(9).
B. Pre-Operational Site Reviews
The number of Site Reviews to be completed prior to initiating Contractor
operation in a Service Area must be based upon the total number of new
Primary Care sites in the Network. For more than 30 sites in the Network,
a five (5) percent sample size or a minimum of 30 sites, whichever is
greater in number, must be reviewed six (6) weeks prior to Contractor
operation. Site Reviews must be completed on all remaining sites within
six (6) months of Contractor operation. For 30 or fewer sites, reviews must
be completed on all sites six (6) weeks prior to Contractor operation.
C. Credentialing Site Review
A Site Review is required as part of the Credentialing process when both
the facility and the Provider are added to Contractor’s Network. If a
Provider is added to Contractor’s Network, and the Provider site has a
current passing Site Review survey score, a site survey need not be
repeated for Provider Credentialing or recredentialing purposes.
D. Corrective Action
Contractor must ensure that a Corrective Action plan is developed to
correct cited deficiencies and that corrections are completed and verified
within the established guidelines as specified in APL 22-017. PCP sites
that do not correct cited deficiencies must be terminated from Contractor’s
Network; Contractor must assign Members to other Network Providers in
accordance with APL 21-003.
E. Data Submission
Contractor must submit the Site Review data to DHCS up to quarterly, or
in a manner or timeframe specified by DHCS. All data elements defined by
DHCS must be included in the data submission report.
[[page 379]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 379 of 642
F. Continuing Oversight
Contractor must retain accountability for all Site Review activities even if
this function is delegated.
G. Medical Record Documentation
1) General Requirement
Contractor must ensure the documentation of appropriate Medical
Records for Members and that Medical Records are available to
Providers at each Encounter in accordance with 42 USC section
1396a(w), 28 CCR section 1300.67.1(c), and APL 20-006.
2) Medical Records
Contractor must have policies and procedures for developing,
implementing and maintaining written procedures for all forms of
Medical Record retention including but not limited to:
a) For storage and filing of Medical Records including:
collection, processing, maintenance, storage, retrieval,
identification, and distribution;
b) To ensure that Medical Records are protected and
confidential in accordance with all federal and State law;
c) For the release of information and obtaining consent for
treatment; and
d) To ensure maintenance of Medical Records in a legible,
current, detailed, organized and comprehensive manner
(records may be electronic or paper copy).
3) On-Site Medical Records
Contractor must have policies and procedures to ensure that an
individual is delegated the responsibility for securing and
maintaining the security of Medical Records at each site.
4) Member Medical Record
Contractor must ensure that a complete, legible Medical Record is
maintained for each Member in accordance with 22 CCR section
53861, which reflects all aspects of patient care, including, but not
limited to, ancillary services, and at a minimum includes:
[[page 380]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 380 of 642
a) Member identification on each page; personal/biographical
data in the record;
b) Member’s preferred language (if other than English)
prominently noted in the record, as well as the request or
refusal of language/interpretation services in accordance
with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964;
c) All entries dated with the author identified. For Member
visits, all entries must include at a minimum, the
documentation of subjective complaints, the objective
findings, the plan for diagnosis and treatment, and follow-up
care;
d) A problem list, a complete record of immunizations and
health maintenance or preventive services rendered, and
documentation of any outreach efforts surrounding any
missed appointments;
e) Allergies and adverse reactions prominently noted;
f) All appropriate informed consent documentation, including
the human sterilization consent procedures required by 22
CCR sections 51305.1 - 51305.6, if applicable;
g) Reports of Emergency Services provided (directly by the
Network Provider or through an emergency room) and the
hospital discharge summaries for all hospital admissions,
including any follow-up after the provision of Emergency
Services or hospitalizations;
h) Consultations and referrals, including for Complex Care
Management (CCM), Enhanced Care Management, and
Specialists, as well as evidence of review of specialty
referrals, pathology, and laboratory reports. Any abnormal
results must have an explicit notation in the Medical Record,
including follow-up or outreach;
i) For Medical Records of adults, documentation of whether
the individual has been informed and has executed an
Advance Directive, such as a durable power of attorney, for
health care for Members ages 18 and over;
j) Health education behavioral assessment and referrals to
health education services where appropriate; and
[[page 381]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 381 of 642
k) Documentation of blood lead screening, immunizations, and
other preventive services provided in accordance with the
American Academy of Pediatrics Bright Futures Periodicity
Schedule, the United States Preventive Services Task
Force Grade A and B recommendations, the American
College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists, and the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practice recommendations.
Member refusal to receive blood lead screening,
immunizations, or other preventive services must also be
documented in the Member’s Medical Record as described
in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.3 (Scope of Services).
5.2.15 Street Medicine
Contractor may provide medical and other Covered Services as described in APL
24-001 via a Street Medicine program for Members experiencing unsheltered
homelessness through contracted Street Medicine Providers. Street Medicine
Providers are Providers or entities that Contractor has determined can provide
Street Medicine services to eligible Members in an effective manner consistent
with Street Medicine industry protocols and practices. Street Medicine Providers
may act in the role of the Member’s assigned PCP, through a direct contract with
Contractor, as an Enhanced Care Management (ECM) Provider, a Community
Supports Provider, a referring or treating contracted Provider, or Community
Health Worker as set forth in APL 24-001. This subsection refers only to Street
Medicine programs and Street Medicine Providers that Contractor may choose to
offer.
A. Contracted Street Medicine Providers acting in the role of a Member’s
assigned PCP are licensed physician and non-physician medical
practitioners (e.g., Doctor of Medicine (MD)/Doctor of Osteopathic
Medicine (DO), Physician Assistant (PA), NP, and CNM. For a non-
physician medical practitioner (PA, NP, and CNM), Contractors must
ensure compliance with State law and Contract requirements regarding
physician supervision of non-physician medical practitioners. Additionally,
given the unique and specialized nature of Street Medicine, a supervising
Physician must be a practicing Street Medicine provider, with knowledge
of, and experience in, Street Medicine clinical guidelines and protocols.
Street Medicine Providers who choose to act as a Member’s assigned
PCP must agree to provide the essential components of the Medical
Home in order to provide comprehensive and continuous medical care,
such as Basic Population Health Management; Care Coordination and
health promotion; support for Members, their families, and their ARs;
referrals to Specialists, including Behavioral Health, community, and social
support services, when needed; use of Health Information Technology to
link services, as feasible and appropriate; and provision of primary and
[[page 382]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 382 of 642
preventative services to assigned Members. If the Street Medicine
Provider does not have the capability to provide Primary Care services on
the street, the Street Medicine Provider must be affiliated with a facility
that has a physical location.
B. Contractor must ensure Street Medicine Providers have the capability to,
and comply with, referral and Care Coordination, administrative, billing
and claim, data sharing, and reporting requirements.
C. Contractor must ensure Street Medicine Providers acting in the capacity of
an ECM and/or Community Supports Providers comply with requirements
as set forth in APL 21-012 and/or APL 21-017. Contractor is to ensure
Street Medicine Providers receive appropriate Provider training and
manuals and have adequate systems in place to adhere to such
requirements.
D. Contractor must submit contractually required policies and procedures
exhibiting compliance with program policy and requirements, and receive
approval from DHCS, before operating a Street Medicine program.
[[page 383]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 383 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
5.3 Scope of Services
5.3.1 Covered Services
5.3.2 Medically Necessary Services
5.3.3 Initial Health Appointment
5.3.4 Services for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age
5.3.5 Services for Adults
5.3.6 Pregnant and Postpartum Members
5.3.7 Services for All Members
5.3.8 Investigational Services
[[page 384]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 384 of 642
5.3 Scope of Services
5.3.1 Covered Services
A. Contractor must provide or arrange for all Covered Services for Members,
in accordance with the definition of Covered Services set forth in Exhibit A,
Attachment I, Article 1.0 (Definitions). Contractor must ensure that
Covered Services and other services required in this Contract are
provided to a Member in an amount no less than what is offered to Medi-
Cal beneficiaries in Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service (FFS), as defined in the
most current Medi-Cal Provider Manual and consistent with current,
evidence-based medical standards. Contractor has the primary
responsibility to provide all Covered Services, including services that
exceed the services provided by Local Education Agencies (LEAs),
Regional Centers (RCs), or local governmental health programs.
B. Contractor must ensure that services provided are sufficient in amount,
duration, and scope to reasonably achieve the purpose for which the
Covered Services are furnished. Contractor must not arbitrarily deny or
reduce the amount, duration, or scope of a required Covered Service
solely because of the diagnosis, type of illness, or condition. Contractor
may place appropriate limits on a Covered Service on the basis of
Medical Necessity or utilization control for services that are not medical
services (such as Community Support services), provided the services
furnished are reasonably expected to achieve their purpose and are
provided in a manner that reflects the Member’s ongoing needs, including
but not limited to services for chronic conditions.
C. Except as set forth in Attachment 3.1.B.1 of the California Medicaid State
Plan or as otherwise authorized by Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I)
section 14133.23, drug benefits for Members who are eligible for drug
benefits under 42 United States Code (USC) section 1395w-101 et seq.)
are not a Covered Service under this Contract. Contractor must comply
with all applicable provisions of the Medicare Prescription Drug
Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003, Policy Letter (PL) 108–173,
December 8, 2003, 117 Stat 2066.
D. Unless expressly excluded under this Contract, Contractor must cover any
services necessary for compliance with the requirements for parity in
mental health and Substance Use Disorder (SUD) benefits, and ensure
that Members are given access to all mental health and SUD services in
accordance with 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.900.
The types, amount, duration, and scope of these services must be
consistent with the parity compliance analysis conducted by either DHCS
or Contractor.
[[page 385]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 385 of 642
1) If Contractor provides Members with mental health or SUD services
in any classification of benefits as described in 42 CFR section
438.910(b)(2), then Contractor must provide to Members those
services in every classification that is listed therein and is covered
by Contractor. In determining the classification in which a particular
benefit belongs, Contractor must apply the same reasonable
standards for medical/surgical benefits to mental health or SUD
benefits.
2) Contractor must provide referrals and Care Coordination for all non-
covered mental health and SUD services, as required in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsections 4.3.12 (Mental Health Services) and
4.3.13 (Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Treatment Services).
E. Covered Services may be provided to Members through Telehealth, as
defined in W&I section 14132.72, and as follows:
1) Contractor is responsible for ensuring that Covered Services
provided via a Telehealth modality meet DHCS guidelines in
outlined in the Provider Manual.
2) Contractor must oversee that Providers only provide Covered
Services that can be appropriately delivered via Telehealth, and
that they not provide Covered Services that would otherwise
require the in-person presence of the Member for any reason, such
as those that are performed in an operating room or while the
Member is under anesthesia, where direct visualization or
instrumentation of bodily structures is required, or procedures that
involve sampling of tissue or insertion/removal of medical devices.
3) Contractor must ensure all Providers furnishing applicable Covered
Services via audio-only synchronous interactions also offer those
same services via video synchronous interactions.
4) Contractor must ensure all Providers furnishing services through
video synchronous interactions or audio-only synchronous
interactions must do one of the following:
a) Offer those same services via in-person, face-to-face
contact.
b) Arrange for a referral to, and a facilitation of, in-person care
that does not require a Member to independently contact a
different Provider to arrange for that care.
[[page 386]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 386 of 642
5) Contractor is responsible for ensuring Members are informed prior
to the initial delivery of Covered Services via Telehealth about the
use of Telehealth. Contractor must also ensure Providers obtain
and document verbal or written consent from Members for the use
of Telehealth as an acceptable mode of delivering services prior to
the initial delivery of Covered Services. Consent must be
documented in the Member’s Medical Record and made available
to DHCS upon request.
6) Contractor must communicate to Providers any periodical updates
to Covered Services and Provider types and requirements that may
be appropriately delivered through Telehealth.
5.3.2 Medically Necessary Services
Contractor must apply the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and
Treatment (EPSDT) standard of Medical Necessity for Members less than 21
years of age, as set forth in 42 USC section 1396d(r)(5) and All Plan Letter (APL)
23-005. The terms Medically Necessary, or Medical Necessity, are defined in
Exhibit A, Attachment I, Article 1.0 (Definitions), based upon whether a Member
is less than 21 years of age, or ages 21 and over.
5.3.3 Initial Health Appointment
Contractor must ensure provision of an Initial Health Appointment (IHA) in
accordance with 22 California Code of Regulations (CCR) sections 53851(b)(1),
53910.5(a)(1) and APL 22-030. An IHA at a minimum must include: a history of
the Member's physical and mental health, an identification of risks, an
assessment of need for preventive screens or services and health education, a
physical examination, and the diagnosis and plan for treatment of any diseases,
unless the Member's Primary Care Provider (PCP) determines that the Member's
Medical Record contains complete information, updated within the previous 12
months, consistent with the assessment requirements. Contractor must continue
to hold Network Providers accountable for providing all preventive screenings for
adults and Children as recommended by the United States Preventive Services
Taskforce (USPSTF) but will no longer require all of these elements to be
completed during the IHA, so long as Members receive all required screenings in
a timely manner consistent with USPSTF guidelines.
A. Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of an IHA for each new
Member within timelines stipulated in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsections 5.3.4 (Services for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age) and
5.3.5 (Services for Adults) below.
[[page 387]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 387 of 642
B. Contractor must ensure that a Member’s completed IHA is documented in
their Medical Record and that appropriate assessments from the IHA are
available during subsequent health visits.
C. Contractor must make reasonable attempts to contact a Member to
schedule an IHA. Contractor must document all attempts to contact a
Member. Documented attempts that demonstrate Contractor’s efforts to
unsuccessfully contact a Member and schedule an IHA will be considered
evidence in meeting this requirement. Contractor may delegate these
activities, but Contractor remains ultimately responsible for all delegated
functions, as outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.1
(Overview of Contractor’s Duties and Obligations).
5.3.4 Services for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age
Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of all screening, preventive and
Medically Necessary diagnostic and treatment services for Members less than 21
years of age required under the EPSDT benefit described in 42 USC section
1396d(r), W&I section 14132(v), and APL 23-005. The EPSDT benefit includes
all Medically Necessary health care, diagnostic services, treatments, and other
services listed in 42 USC section 1396d(a), whether or not covered under the
California Medicaid State Plan. All EPSDT services are Covered Services unless
expressly excluded under this Contract.
A. Provision of IHA for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age
1) For Members less than 18 months of age, Contractor must ensure
the provision of an IHA within 120 calendar days following the date
of Enrollment or within periodicity timelines established by the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Bright Futures for ages two
and younger, whichever is sooner.
2) For Members ages 18 months and older, Contractor must ensure
an IHA is performed within 120 calendar days of Enrollment.
3) The IHA must provide, or arrange for provision of, all immunizations
necessary to ensure that the Member is up to date for their age,
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) screening, and any
required age-specific screenings including developmental
screenings.
4) If the provisions of the IHA are not met, then Contractor must
ensure case management and Care Coordination are working
directly with the Member to receive appropriate services to include
but not limited to health screenings, immunizations, and risk
assessments.
[[page 388]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 388 of 642
B. Children’s Preventive Services
1) Contractor must provide preventive health visits for all Members
less than 21 years of age at times specified by the most recent AAP
Bright Futures Periodicity Schedule and anticipatory guidance as
outlined in the AAP Bright Futures Periodicity Schedule. Contractor
must provide, as part of the periodic preventive visit, all age-specific
assessments and services required by AAP Bright Futures.
2) Where a request is made for Children’s preventive services by the
Member, the Member's parent, legal guardian, or Authorized
Representatives (ARs), or through a referral, an appointment must
be made for the Member to have a visit within ten Working Days of
the request, unless Member declines a visit within ten Working
Days of the request and another appointment date is chosen by the
Member.
3) At each Non-emergency Primary Care visit with a Member less
than 21 years of age, the Member (if an emancipated minor), or the
parent, legal guardian, or AR of the Member, must be advised of
the Children’s preventive services due and available from
Contractor. Documentation must be entered in the Member's
Medical Record which indicates the receipt of Children’s preventive
services in accordance with the AAP Bright Futures standards. If
the services are refused, documentation must be entered in the
Member's Medical Record which indicates the services were
advised, and the Member’s (if an emancipated minor), or the
parent, legal guardian, or AR of the Member’s voluntary refusal of
these services.
4) All children’s preventive services, including all confidential
screening and billing reports for EPSDT screening, treatment, and
Care Coordination, must be reported as part of the Encounter Data
submittal required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.1.2
(Encounter Data Reporting). Contractor must ensure appropriate
acquisition for missed reporting of Children’s preventive services.
C. Immunizations
1) Contractor must cover vaccinations, except for vaccinations
expressly excluded in DHCS guidance to Medi-Cal Managed Care
Health Plans, at the time of any health care visit and ensure the
timely provision of vaccines in accordance with the most recent
childhood immunization schedule and recommendations published
by Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
[[page 389]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 389 of 642
Documented attempts that demonstrate Contractor’s unsuccessful
efforts to provide the vaccination will be considered sufficient in
meeting this requirement. When practical, reasons for failed
attempts should be medically coded.
2) At each Non-Emergency Primary Care visit with Members less than
21 years of age, the Member (if an emancipated minor), or the
parent, legal guardian, or AR of the Member, must be advised of
the vaccinations due and available from Contractor immediately, if
the Member has not received vaccinations in accordance with ACIP
standards. Documentation must be entered in the Member's
Medical Record which indicates the receipt of vaccinations or proof
of prior vaccination in accordance with ACIP standards. If
vaccinations that could be given at the time of the visit are refused,
documentation must be entered in the Member's Medical Record
which indicates the vaccinations were advised, and the Member’s
(if an emancipated minor), or the parent, legal guardian, or AR of
the Member’s voluntary refusal of these vaccinations. If
vaccinations cannot be given at the time of the visit, then it is
required that the Medical Record must demonstrate that the
Member was informed how to obtain necessary vaccinations or
scheduled for a future appointment for vaccinations.
3) Contractor must ensure that Member-specific vaccination
information is reported to immunization registries established in
Contractor’s Service Area(s) as part of the Statewide Immunization
Information System. Reports must be made following the Member’s
IHA and all other health care visits that result in an administered
vaccine within 14 calendar days. Reporting must be in accordance
with all applicable State and federal laws.
4) Within 30 calendar days of Federal Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approval of any vaccine for childhood immunization
purposes, Contractor must develop policies and procedures for the
provision and administration of the vaccine. Contractor must cover
and ensure the provision of the vaccine from the date of its
approval regardless of whether or not the vaccine has been
incorporated into the Vaccines for Children (VFC) Program. Policies
and procedures must be in accordance with Medi-Cal guidelines
issued prior to final ACIP recommendations.
5) Contractor must provide information to all Network Providers
regarding the VFC Program and is encouraged to promote and
support Enrollment of applicable Network Providers in the VFC
program as see appropriate.
[[page 390]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 390 of 642
D. Screening for Childhood Lead Poisoning
1) Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of blood lead
screening tests to Members at the ages and intervals specified in
17 CCR sections 37000 - 37100, and in accordance with APL 20-
016. Contractor must ensure its Network Providers follow the
Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Branch (CLPPB) guidelines
when interpreting blood lead levels and determining appropriate
follow-up activities, including, without limitation, appropriate
referrals to the local public health department.
a) While requirements for appropriate follow-up activities,
including referral, case management, and reporting, are set
forth in the CLPPB guidelines, a Network Provider may
determine that additional services that fall within the EPSDT
benefit are Medically Necessary.
b) Contractor must ensure that Members less than 21 years of
age receive all Medically Necessary care as required under
EPSDT.
2) Contractor must identify, at least quarterly, all Members less than
six years of age with no record of receiving a required blood lead
screening test. Contractor must identify the age(s) at which a
required blood lead screening test was missed, including Members
under the age of six, without any record of a completed blood lead
screening test at each age. On a quarterly basis, Contractor must
notify the Network Provider responsible for the care of an identified
Member of the requirement to test the Member and provide the
written or oral anticipatory guidance as required pursuant to 17
CCR section 37100. For a period of no less than ten years,
Contractor must maintain records of all Members identified
quarterly as having no documentation of receiving a required blood
lead screening test, and provide those records to DHCS at least
annually, as well as upon request.
3) If the Member, or the Member’s parent, legal guardian, or AR,
refuses the blood lead screening test, Contractor must ensure a
signed statement of voluntary refusal by the Member (if an
emancipated minor), or the parent, legal guardian, or AR of the
Member, is documented in the Member’s Medical Record.
4) If Contractor is unable to ensure a signed statement of voluntary
refusal is documented in the Member's Medical Record because
the Member, or the Member's parent, legal guardian, or AR refuses
or declines to sign, or is unable to sign, such as when services are
[[page 391]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 391 of 642
provided through a Telehealth modality, Contractor must ensure
that the reason for not obtaining a signed statement of voluntary
refusal is documented in the Member’s Medical Record.
5) DHCS will consider unsuccessful attempts to provide the required
blood lead screening tests that are documented in the Member’s
Medical Record in accordance with the requirements in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.4.D. (Services for Members Less
Than 21 Years of Age) as evidence of Contractor’s compliance with
blood lead screening test requirements.
E. EPSDT Services
1) For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must comply
with all requirements identified in APL 23-005. Contractor must
provide, or arrange and pay for, all Medically Necessary EPSDT
services, including all Medicaid services listed in 42 USC section
1396d(a), whether or not included in the California Medicaid State
Plan, unless expressly excluded in this Contract. Covered Services
will include, without limitation, in-home nursing provided by home
health agencies or individual nurse Providers, as required by APL
20-012, Care Coordination, case management, and Targeted Case
Management (TCM) services. If Members less than 21 years of age
are not eligible or accepted for Medically Necessary TCM services
by a RC or local government health program, per requirements in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local
Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third Parties),
Contractor must arrange for comparable services for the Member
under the EPSDT benefit in accordance with APL 23-005.
2) Contractor must arrange for any Medically Necessary diagnostic
and treatment services identified at a preventive screening or other
visit indicating the need for diagnosis or treatment, either directly or
through referral to appropriate agencies, organizations, or
individuals, as required by 42 USC section 1396a(a)(43)(C), APL
23-005, and APL 20-012. Contractor must ensure that all Medically
Necessary EPSDT services, including all Covered Services set
forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.4.E.1) (Services
for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age), above, as well as
EPSDT services carved out of this Contract, are provided in a
timely manner, as soon as possible but no later than 60 calendar
days following the preventive screening or other visit identifying a
need for diagnosis or treatment. Without limitation, Contractor must
identify available Providers, including if necessary out-of-Network
Providers and individuals eligible to enroll as Medi-Cal Providers, to
ensure the timely provision of Medically Necessary EPSDT
[[page 392]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 392 of 642
services. Contractor must provide appointment scheduling
assistance and necessary transportation, including Non-Emergency
Medical Transportation (NEMT) and Non-Medical Transportation
(NMT), to and from medical appointments for Covered Services
and pharmacy services. NMT must also be provided for services
not covered under this Contract.
3) Covered Services do not include California Children's Services
(CCS), pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.14
(California Children’s Services), or Specialty Mental Health
Services (SMHS), pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
4.3.12 (Mental Health Services). Contractor must ensure that the
case management for Medically Necessary services authorized by
CCS, county mental health plans, Drug Medi-Cal or Drug Medi-Cal
Organized Delivery System (DMC-ODS)Plans under this
Subsection is equivalent to that provided by Contractor for Covered
Services for Members less than 21 years of age under this Contract
and must, if indicated or upon the Member's request, provide
additional Care Coordination and case management services as
necessary to meet the Member's medical and Behavioral Health
needs.
F. Behavioral Health Treatment Services
For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must cover Medically
Necessary Behavioral Health Treatment (BHT) services regardless of
diagnosis in compliance with APL 22-006 and APL 23-010.
1) Contractor must provide Medically Necessary BHT services in
accordance with a recommendation from a licensed physician,
surgeon, or a licensed psychologist and must provide continuation
of BHT services under continuity of care.
2) The Member’s treatment plan must be reviewed, revised, and/or
modified no less than every six months by a BHT service Provider.
The Member’s behavioral treatment plan may be modified or
discontinued only if it is determined that the services are no longer
Medically Necessary under the EPSDT Medical Necessity
standard.
3) Contractor has primary responsibility for the provision of Medically
Necessary BHT services and must coordinate with LEAs, RCs, and
other entities that provide BHT services to ensure that Members
timely receive all Medically Necessary BHT services, consistent
with the EPSDT benefit. Contractor must provide Medically
Necessary BHT services across settings, including home, school,
[[page 393]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 393 of 642
and in the community, that are not duplicative of BHT services
actively provided by another entity. Contractor must coordinate
with, and make good faith attempts to enter into Memorandum of
Understandings (MOUs) with RCs and LEAs, and Contractor must
enter into MOUs with County Mental Health Plans (MHPs) in
accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.6.1 (MOU
Purpose), to facilitate the coordination of services for Members with
Developmental Disabilities, including Autism Spectrum Disorder
(ASD), as permitted by federal and State law, and specified by
DHCS in APL 22-005 and APL 22-006. If Contractor is unable to
enter into an MOU or a one-time case agreement with a RC,
Contractor must inform DHCS why it could not reach an agreement
with the RC and must demonstrate, by providing all evidence of
contracting efforts, a good faith effort to enter into an agreement
with the RC.
G. Local Education Agency Services
Contractor must reimburse LEAs, as appropriate, for the provision of
school-linked EPSDT services including but not limited to BHT as
specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.16 (School-Based
Services).
H. Rapid Whole Genome Sequencing
Rapid whole genome sequencing, including individual sequencing, trio
sequencing for a parent or parents and their baby, and ultra-rapid
sequencing, is a Covered Service for any Medi-Cal Member who is one
year of age or younger and is receiving inpatient hospital services in an
intensive care unit as required in W&I section 14132(a)(e).
5.3.5 Services for Adults
A. Initial Health Appointment for Adults Ages 21 and over
1) Contractor must cover and ensure that IHAs for adult Members are
performed within 120 calendar days of Enrollment.
2) Contractor must ensure that the IHA for adults includes, but is not
limited to, an evaluation of applicable preventive services provided
in accordance with the United States Preventive Services
Taskforce (USPSTF) grade A and B recommendations.
B. Adult Preventive Services
[[page 394]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 394 of 642
Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of all preventive services
and Medically Necessary diagnostic and treatment services for adult
Members as follows:
1) Contractor must ensure provision of all applicable preventive
services identified as USPSTF grade A and B recommendations for
adult Members in accordance with the Guide to Clinical Preventive
Services published by the USPSTF.
2) Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of all Medically
Necessary diagnostic, treatment, and follow-up services which are
necessary given the findings or risk factors identified in the IHA, or
during visits for routine, urgent, or emergent health care situations.
Contractor must ensure that these services are initiated as soon as
possible but no later than 60 calendar days following discovery of a
problem requiring follow up.
3) Contractor must comply with APL 22-025 and ensure the provision
of an annual cognitive health assessment for Members who are 65
years of age or older and are otherwise ineligible to receive a
similar assessment as part of a Medicare annual wellness visit.
C. Immunizations
1) Contractor must cover vaccinations, except for vaccinations
expressly excluded by DHCS in guidance to Medi-Cal Managed
Care Health Plans, at the time of any health care visit and ensure
the timely provision of vaccines in accordance with the most recent
adult immunization schedule and recommendations published by
the ACIP. Documented attempts that demonstrate Contractor’s
unsuccessful efforts to provide the vaccination will be considered
sufficient in meeting this requirement.
2) In addition, Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of age
and risk appropriate vaccinations in accordance with the findings of
the IHA, or other preventive screenings.
3) At each non-emergency Primary Care Encounter the Member must
be advised of the vaccinations due and available from Contractor, if
the Member has not received vaccinations in accordance with ACIP
standards. Documentation must be entered in the Member's
Medical Record which indicates the receipt of vaccinations or proof
of prior vaccination in accordance with ACIP standards. If
vaccinations that could be given at the time of the visit are refused,
documentation must be entered in the Member's Medical Record
which indicates the vaccinations were advised, and the Member’s
[[page 395]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 395 of 642
voluntary refusal of these vaccinations. If vaccinations cannot be
given at the time of the visit, then it is required that the Medical
Record must demonstrate that the Member was informed how to
obtain necessary vaccinations or scheduled for a future
appointment for vaccinations.
4) Contractor must ensure that Member-specific vaccination
information is reported to immunization registries established in
Contractor’s Service Area(s) as part of the Statewide Immunization
Information System. Reports will be made following the Member’s
IHA and all other health care visits that result in an administered
vaccine within 14 calendar days. Reporting will be in accordance
with all applicable State and federal laws.
5.3.6 Pregnant and Postpartum Members
A. Prenatal and Postpartum Care
Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of all Medically Necessary
services for Members who are pregnant and postpartum. Contractor must
utilize the most current standards or guidelines of American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and Comprehensive Perinatal
Services Program (CPSP) to ensure Members receive quality perinatal
and postpartum services.
B. Risk Assessment
Contractor must implement a comprehensive risk assessment tool for all
pregnant Members that is comparable to the ACOG standard and CPSP
standards per 22 CCR section 51348. Contractor must maintain the
results of this assessment as part of the Member’s obstetrical record,
which must include medical/obstetrical, nutritional, psychosocial, and
health education needs risk assessment components. The risk
assessment tool must be administered at the initial prenatal visit, once
each trimester thereafter, and at the postpartum visit. If administration of
the risk assessment tool is missed at the appropriate timeframes, then
Contractor must ensure case management and Care Coordination are
working directly with the Member to accomplish the assessment.
Contractor must follow up on all identified risks with appropriate
interventions consistent with ACOG standards and CPSP standards and
document those interventions in the Member’s Medical Record. The risk
assessment may be completed virtually through a Telehealth visit with the
Member’s consent.
C. Referral to Specialists
[[page 396]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 396 of 642
Contractor must ensure that pregnant Members are referred to medically
appropriate Specialists, including, as appropriate, perinatologists,
Freestanding Birthing Centers, Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs),
Licensed Midwives, and, are informed about Doula coverage. Pregnant
Members may request and receive a recommendation for Doula services
from a physician or other licensed practitioner of the healing arts acting
within their scope of practice under State law and receive services.
Contractor must ensure that pregnant and postpartum Members receive a
recommendation for Doula services within one year after pregnancy, if
requested by the Member, and must ensure access to genetic screening
with appropriate referrals. Members may receive one initial visit; eight
visits at any time during the perinatal period; services during labor and
delivery, miscarriage, or abortion; and two extended postpartum visits with
the standing recommendation issued by DHCS. An additional nine visits
during the postpartum period is available with a second recommendation
from a licensed provider. Contractor must comply with section 440.130(c)
of Title 42 of the Code of Federal Regulations when making a
recommendation for Doula services. Doula services are a preventive
benefit for Medi-Cal Members, and services include but are not limited to
personal support to pregnant individuals and families throughout
pregnancy, labor, and the postpartum period. Contractor must also ensure
that appropriate hospitals are available within the Network to provide
necessary high-risk pregnancy services.
5.3.7 Services for All Members
A. Health Education
1) Contractor must implement and maintain a health education system
that includes programs, services, functions, and resources
necessary to provide health education, health promotion, and
patient education for all Members.
2) Contractor must ensure administrative oversight of the health
education system by a qualified full-time health educator.
3) Contractor must provide evidence-based health education
programs and services to Members, directly, or through
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, or Network
Providers.
4) Contractor must ensure organized delivery of health education
programs using educational strategies and methods that are
appropriate for Members and effective in achieving behavioral
change for improved health. Contractor may offer Members non-
[[page 397]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 397 of 642
monetary incentives for participating in incentive programs, focus
groups, and Member surveys authorized by W&I section 14407.1
pursuant to APL 16-005.
5) Contractor must ensure that health education materials are written
at the sixth-grade reading level and are culturally and linguistically
appropriate for the intended audience in accordance with APL 18-
016. Contractor must review health education materials to ensure
documents are up-to-date.
6) Contractor must ensure availability of Community Health Workers
(CHWs) to all Members. CHWs should provide services to include
but are not limited to assisting Members with health care system
navigation, communicating cultural and language preferences to
providers, accessing health care services, educating health needs,
and connecting individuals and families with community-based
resources.
7) Contractor must maintain a health education system, or use a
DHCS-sponsored system if available, that provides educational
interventions addressing health categories and topics that align with
the Population Health Management (PHM) Strategy, in accordance
with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 4.3 (Population Health
Management and Coordination of Care), including education
regarding the appropriate use of health care services, risk-reduction
and healthy lifestyles, and self-care and management of health
conditions.
8) Contractor must ensure that Members receive point of service
education as part of preventive and primary health care visits.
Contractor must provide education, training, and program
resources to Network Providers for the delivery of health education
services.
9) Contractor must maintain health education policies, procedures,
standards, and guidelines. Contractor must maintain documentation
that demonstrates effective implementation of the health education
requirements.
10) Contractor must monitor the health education system including
accessibility for Limited English Proficient (LEP) Members and the
performance of Providers that are contracted to deliver health
education services. Contractor must ensure appropriate allocation
of health education resources and conduct appropriate levels of
program evaluation.
[[page 398]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 398 of 642
B. Hospice Care
1) Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of hospice care
services as defined in 42 USC section 1396d(o)(1) and as required
by APL 13-014. Contractor must ensure that Members and their
families are fully informed of the availability of hospice care as a
Covered Service and the methods by which they may elect to
receive these services. In accordance with APL 13-014, a hospice
must obtain written certification of terminal illness for each hospice
benefit period. “Terminally ill,” as defined in 42 CFR section 418.3,
means that an individual has a medical prognosis that their life
expectancy is six months or less if the illness runs its normal
course. Services are limited to Members who directly or through
their AR voluntarily elect to receive hospice care in lieu of other
care as specified. However, for Members less than 21 years of age,
a voluntary election of hospice care does not constitute a waiver of
any rights of that Member to be provided with, or to have payment
made for, Covered Services that are related to the treatment of that
Member’s condition for which a diagnosis of terminal illness has
been made.
2) For Members who have elected hospice care, Contractor must
arrange for continuity of care, including maintaining established
patient-Provider relationships, to the greatest extent possible.
Contractor must cover the cost of all hospice care provided.
Contractor must also cover all Medically Necessary care not related
to the terminal condition.
C. Palliative Care
Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of palliative care, as
required by W&I section 14132.75 and as set forth in APL 18-020, and as
required for Members less than 21 years of age under the EPSDT benefit
and standard of Medical Necessity. Contractor must continue to cover all
Medically Necessary Covered Services for Members receiving palliative
care. For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must cover
palliative care concurrently with hospice care and other Medically
Necessary Covered Services if hospice care is elected by the Member.
D. Vision Care – Lenses
Contractor must cover and ensure the provision of eye examinations to
include screening examinations and prescriptions for corrective lenses as
appropriate for all Members. Contractor must arrange for the fabrication of
optical lenses for Members through Prison Industry Authority (PIA) optical
laboratories except when the Member requires lenses not available
[[page 399]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 399 of 642
through PIA. Contractor must cover the cost of the eye examination and
dispensing of the lenses fabricated by PIA. DHCS will reimburse PIA for
the fabrication of the optical lenses in accordance with the contract
between DHCS and PIA. Contractor must cover the cost of fabrication and
dispensing of lenses not available through PIA.
E. Mental Health and SUD Services
Contractor must cover all Medically Necessary mental health and SUD
services specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.5.2 (Non-
specialty Mental Health Services and Substance Use Disorder Services)
in compliance with mental health parity requirements in 42 CFR section
438.900 et seq., and Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.5 (Mental Health
and Substance Use Disorder Benefits).
F. Organ and Bone Marrow Transplant Surgeries
Contractor must cover all Medically Necessary organ and bone marrow
transplant surgeries as set forth in the Medi-Cal Provider Manual,
including all updates and amendments to the Manual.
1) Contractor must refer and authorize organ and bone marrow
transplant surgeries to be performed in transplant programs that
meet criteria set forth by DHCS in the Medi-Cal Provider Manual.
2) Contractor must authorize and cover costs for organ or bone
marrow transplants for Members. Contractor must cover all pre and
post-operative transplant-related costs such as, but not limited to,
evaluation, hospitalization, and all Medically Necessary services
such as transportation and prescriptions not covered by and billable
to Medi-Cal Rx.
3) Contractor must refer Members identified as potential organ or
bone marrow transplant candidates to a transplant program
evaluation that meets criteria set forth by DHCS within 72 hours of
receiving the referral. If the transplant program considers the
Member to be a suitable transplant candidate, Contractor must
authorize the request for transplant services on an expedited 72-
hour basis or less if the Member’s condition requires it, or if the
organ or bone marrow the Member will receive is at risk of being
unusable due to any delay in obtaining Prior Authorization or any
delay in obtaining the organ or bone marrow.
4) Contractor must refer Members less than 21 years of age identified
as a potential organ or bone marrow transplant candidate to the
local CCS Program for eligibility determination, if necessary, unless
[[page 400]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 400 of 642
Contractor is responsible for the CCS benefit (Whole Child Model
contracts only). Major Organ Transplants (MOT) for Members less
than 21 years of age must be performed only in a CCS-approved
Special Care Center (SCC) or DHCS-approved Transplant Centers
of Excellence. If the CCS Program determines that the Member is
not eligible for the CCS Program or the MOT is not related to the
Member’s CCS eligible medical condition, but the MOT is Medically
Necessary, Contractor must refer the Member to a transplant
program within 72 hours of receipt of the eligibility determination
and is responsible for authorizing the MOT, as appropriate.
5) Contractor must refer CCS-eligible Members less than 21 years of
age to the appropriate CCS-approved Special Care Center that
meets criteria set forth by DHCS within 72 hours of receiving the
referral from the Member’s PCP or Specialist identifying the
Member as a transplant candidate. If the CCS-approved Special
Care Center considers the Member to be a suitable transplant
candidate, Contractor is required to approve the Prior Authorization
request.
6) For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must provide
Prior Authorization for requests for transplant services on an
expedited, 72-hour basis, or less if the Member’s condition requires
it or if the organ or bone marrow the Member will receive is at risk
of being unusable due to any delay in obtaining Prior Authorization
or any delay in obtaining the organ or bone marrow.
7) Contractor must authorize and cover costs for organ or bone
marrow donors, including cadavers and living donors regardless of
a living donor’s Medi-Cal eligibility. Contractor must cover
transplant-related costs such as evaluation, hospitalization for the
living donor, organ or bone marrow removal, and all Medically
Necessary services related to organ or bone marrow removal
including complications, transportation, and prescriptions not
covered by and billable to Medi-Cal Rx.
8) Contractor must ensure coordination of care between all Providers,
organ or bone marrow donation entities, and transplant centers to
ensure the transplant is completed as expeditiously as possible.
This coordination of care must include care for all living donors.
9) Contractor must ensure the provision of Discharge Planning as
defined in this Contract for Members and living donors.
[[page 401]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 401 of 642
10) Contractor must cover all readmissions and other health care costs
related to any complications the Member or the living donor
experiences from the organ or bone marrow transplant.
11) Contractor must cover all Medically Necessary physician
administered drugs provided to a Member or the living donor
administered by a health care professional in a clinic, physician’s
office, or outpatient setting and is needed for the Member receiving
an organ or bone marrow transplant, such as anti-rejection
medication, and any other Medically Necessary Prescription Drug
not covered by Medi-Cal Rx.
G. Long-Term Care Services
Contractor must authorize and cover Long-Term Care (LTC) services as
set forth in APL 23-004, APL 23-023, and APL 23-027. Contractor must
ensure that Members in need of LTC services are placed in a health care
facility that provides the level of care most appropriate to the Member's
medical needs, unless the Member has elected hospice care.
1) Contractor must ensure that Members, other than Members
requesting hospice services, in need of LTC services are placed in
a LTC facility that provides the level of care most appropriate to the
Member's medical needs. Contractor must make Member
placement decisions based on the appropriate level of care, as set
forth in the definitions in 22 CCR sections 51118, 51120, 51120.5,
51121, 51123, 51124, 51124.5, and 51124.6, W&I section
14132.25 and the criteria for admission set forth in 22 CCR
sections 51335, 51335.5, 51335.6, and 51334 and related sections
of the Manual of Criteria for Medi-Cal Authorization referenced in
22 CCR section 51003(e).
2) Contractor must place Members in LTC facilities that are licensed
and certified by the California Department of Public Health (CDPH).
Contractor must ensure that contracted LTC facilities have not been
decertified by CDPH or otherwise excluded from participation in the
Medi-Cal Program.
3) Contractor must provide continuity of care to Members through
continued access to the LTC facility in which the Member is
residing at time of Enrollment for up to 12 months. During this time,
Contractor may attempt to place Members at LTC facilities within its
Network only with approval from the Member or individual
authorized to make health care decisions on their behalf.
[[page 402]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 402 of 642
4) Contractor must cover a Member stay in a facility with availability
regardless of Medical Necessity if placement in a Medically
Necessary appropriate lower level of care is not available, unless
otherwise provided by contract. Contractor must continue to
attempt to place the Member in a facility with the appropriate level
of care, including offering to contract with facilities within and
outside of the Service Area.
5) Contractor must provide Transitional Care Services as specified in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.11 (Targeted Case
Management Services).
6) Hospice Services as defined in 22 CCR section 51180 rendered in
a Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) or Intermediate Care Facility for the
Developmentally Disabled (ICF/DD), ICF/DD-Habilitative (ICFD/DD-
H), and ICF/DD-Nursing (ICF/DD-N) homes are not LTC services
consistent with 22 CCR section 51544(h).
7) Contractor must ensure that Members in need of ICF/DD, ICF/DD-
H, and ICF/DD-N services are placed in the ICF/DD Home deemed
most appropriate to the Member's medical needs as specified in the
Individualized Program Plan (IPP) issued by the Member’s
Regional Center.
H. Pharmaceutical Services
1) Drug Use Review (DUR)
Contractor must develop and implement effective DUR and
treatment outcome process, as directed in APL 17-008, APL 23-
026, and APL 22-012 (excluding prospective DUR activities), to
ensure that drug utilization is appropriate, Medically Necessary,
and not likely to result in adverse events.
a) Contractor’s DUR must meet or exceed the requirements
described in 42 USC section 1396r-8(g) and 42 CFR section
438.3(s), to the extent that Contractor provides covered
outpatient drugs, and Section 1004 requirements of the
Substance Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid
Recovery and Treatment (SUPPORT) for Patient and
Communities Act.
b) Contractor’s DUR must implement:
i. A retrospective claims review automated process that
monitors when a Member is concurrently prescribed
[[page 403]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 403 of 642
opioids and benzodiazepines or opioids and
antipsychotics;
ii. A program to monitor and manage the appropriate
use of antipsychotic medications by all Children 18
years of age and under including foster Children
enrolled under the California Medicaid State Plan, as
required in 42 USC section 1396a(oo)(1)(B), APL 23-
026, and APL 22-012; and
iii. Fraud and abuse identification processes for potential
Fraud or abuse of controlled substances by Members,
Providers, and pharmacies.
c) Contractor must annually submit to DHCS a detailed report
in a format specified by DHCS on their DUR Program
activities.
2) Contractor must not impose Quantitative Treatment Limitation
(QTL) or Non-Quantitative Treatment Limitation (NQTL) more
stringently for mental health and SUD drugs prescriptions than for
medical/surgical drugs, in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.900
et seq.
I. Transportation
Contractor must cover transportation services as required in this Contract
and directed in APL 22-008 to ensure Members have access to all
Medically Necessary services.
1) Contractor must cover Emergency Medical Transportation (EMT)
services necessary to provide access to all emergency Covered
Services.
2) Contractor must cover NEMT services necessary for Members to
access Covered Services, subject to a prescription and Prior
Authorization when required, in accordance with 22 CCR section
51323.
a) Contractor must require Members to have an approved
Physician Certification Statement (PCS) form prescribing
NEMT by their provider, as described in APL 22-008, before
Prior Authorization can be granted for NEMT services,
except as provided in 22 CCR section 51323 (b)(2)(A),(C).
For Covered Services requiring recurring appointments,
Contractor must provide authorization for NEMT for the
[[page 404]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 404 of 642
duration of the recurring appointments, not to exceed 12
months, and ensure the Member has a standing order
guaranteeing assigned rides for the duration of the recurring
appointments. Contractor cannot modify the form once the
provider prescribes the mode of NEMT.
b) Contractor must refer and coordinate NEMT services for
Medi-Cal services that are not covered under the Contract.
However, Contractor must provide NEMT services for their
Members for all pharmacy prescriptions prescribed by the
Member’s Medi-Cal provider(s) and those authorized under
Medi-Cal Rx.
c) Contractor must have a process in place to ensure
transportation brokers and providers are meeting these
requirements and to impose corrective action if non-
compliance is identified through oversight and monitoring
activities.
3) As provided for in W&I section 14132(ad), Contractor must
authorize all NMT for Members to obtain Covered Services in
accordance with the requirements and guidelines set forth in APL
22-008. Nothing in this provision will be construed to prohibit
Contractor from developing policies and procedures that may
include reasonable Utilization Management procedures for NMT.
Contractor must also provide NMT for all Medi-Cal services not
covered under this Contract. These services include, but are not
limited to, Specialty Mental Health Service (SMHS), SUD services,
dental, pharmacy, pharmaceutical services, and any other benefits
delivered through Medi-Cal FFS.
4) Contractor must provide NEMT or NMT for a parent, legal guardian,
or AR when the Member is a minor. With the written consent of a
parent, legal guardian, or AR, Contractor may arrange NEMT or
NMT services for a minor who is unaccompanied by a parent, legal
guardian, or AR. Contractor must provide transportation services
for unaccompanied minors when applicable State or federal law
does not require parental consent for the minor’s service.
Contractor must ensure all necessary written consent forms are
collected prior to arranging transportation for an unaccompanied
minor and cannot arrange NEMT or NMT services for an
unaccompanied minor without the necessary consent forms unless
State or federal law does not require parental consent for minor’s
service.
[[page 405]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 405 of 642
5) Consistent with 42 CFR sections 440.170(a) and 431.53, W&I
section 14132(a) and (d), and APL 22-008, Contractor must also
cover transportation-related travel expenses for Members obtaining
Medically Necessary services. Transportation-related travel
expenses are subject to retroactive reimbursement.
J. Care Management and Care Coordination
1) Contractor must provide all Members with Care Coordination
services as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.8
(Basic Population Health Management).
2) Contractor must provide care management services to all Members
as specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.8 (Basic
Population Health Management) and Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.3.7 (Care Management Programs). Care
management services include, Basic Population Health
Management (Basic PHM), Complex Care Management (CCM),
and Enhanced Care Management (ECM).
K. Dyadic Services
Contractor must provide Dyadic Services and the Family Therapy benefit
for Members less than 21 years of age and/or their caregivers in an
outpatient setting as Medically Necessary as set forth in APL 22-029 and
detailed below.
1) Dyadic Services may be provided by Licensed Clinical Social
Workers, Licensed Professional Clinical Counselors, Licensed
Marriage and Family Therapists, Licensed Psychologists,
Psychiatric Physician Assistants, Psychiatric Nurse Practitioners,
and Psychiatrists. Associate Marriage and Family Therapists,
Associate Professional Clinical Counselors, Associate Clinical
Social Workers, and Psychology Assistants may render services
under a supervising clinician. Appropriately trained nonclinical staff,
including CHWs, are not precluded from screening Members for
issues related to SDOH or performing other nonclinical support
tasks as a component of the Dyadic Behavioral Health (DBH) visit,
as long as the screening is not separately billed.
a) Under the supervision of a supervising Provider from one of
the provider types listed above, CHWs can assist a dyad to
gain access to needed services to support their health
through the CHW benefit for health navigation services.
[[page 406]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 406 of 642
b) Contractor is responsible for ensuring appropriate
supervision of Dyadic Services Providers and educating all
Network Providers on the Dyadic Services benefit.
2) Member Eligibility for Dyadic Services
a) Children and their parent(s)/ caregiver(s) are eligible for DBH
well-Child visits when delivered according to the Bright
Futures/American Academy of Pediatrics periodicity
schedule for behavioral/social/emotional screening
assessment, and when medically necessary, in accordance
with Medi-Cal’s Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic
and Treatment (EPSDT) standards in 42 USC section
1396d(r).
i. Under EPSDT standards, a diagnosis is not required
to qualify for services.
ii. The DBH well-Child visits do not need a particular
recommendation or referral and must be offered as an
appropriate service option even if the Member does
not request them.
b) The family is eligible to receive Dyadic Services so long as
the Child is enrolled in Medi-Cal. The parent(s) or
caregiver(s) does not need to be enrolled in Medi-Cal or
have other coverage so long as the care is for the direct
benefit of the Child.
3) Covered Services
a) Contractor may offer the Dyadic Services benefit through
Telehealth or in-person with locations in any setting
including, but not limited to, pediatric Primary Care settings,
doctor’s offices or clinics, inpatient or outpatient settings in
hospitals, the Member’s home, school-based sites, or
community settings. There are no Service Location
limitations.
b) Covered Dyadic Services are Behavioral Health Services for
Children and/or their parent(s) or caregiver(s), and include:
i. DBH Well-Child Visits
a. The DBH well-Child visit must be limited to
those services not already covered in the
[[page 407]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 407 of 642
medical well-Child visit.
b. When possible and operationally feasible, the
DBH well-Child visit should occur on the same
day as the medical well-Child visit. When this is
not possible, Contractors must ensure the DBH
well-Child visit is scheduled as close as
possible to the medical well-Child visit,
consistent with timely access requirements.
c. Contractor may deliver DBH well-Child visits as
part of the HealthySteps program, a different
DBH program, or in a clinical setting without a
certified DBH program as long as all of the
following components are included:
aa. Behavioral Health history for Child and
parent(s) or caregiver(s), including
parent(s) or caregiver(s) interview
addressing Child’s temperament,
relationship with others, interests,
abilities, and parent or caregiver
concerns.
bb. Developmental history of the Child.
cc. Observation of behavior of Child and
parent(s) or caregiver(s) and interaction
between Child and parent(s) or
caregiver(s).
dd. Mental status assessment of parent(s)
or caregiver(s).
ee. Screening for family needs, which may
include tobacco use, substance use,
utility needs, transportation needs, and
interpersonal safety, including guns in
the home.
ff. Screening for SDOH such as poverty,
food insecurity, housing instability,
access to safe drinking water, and
community level violence.
[[page 408]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 408 of 642
gg. Age-appropriate anticipatory guidance
focused on Behavioral Health
promotion/risk factor reduction.
hh. Making essential referrals and
connections to community resources
through Care Coordination and helping
caregiver(s) prioritize needs.
ii. Dyadic Comprehensive Community Supports
Services, separate and distinct from the California
Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM)
Community Supports, help the Child and their
parent(s) or caregiver(s) gain access to needed
medical, social, educational, and other health-related
services, and may include any of the following:
a. Assistance in maintaining, monitoring, and
modifying covered services, as outlined in the
dyad’s service plan, to address an identified
clinical need.
b. Brief telephone or face-to-face interactions with
a person, family, or other involved member of
the clinical team, for the purpose of offering
assistance in accessing an identified clinical
service.
c. Assistance in finding and connecting to
necessary resources other than covered
services to meet basic needs.
d. Communication and coordination of care with
the Child’s family, medical and dental health
care Providers, community resources, and
other involved supports including educational,
social, judicial, community and other State
agencies.
e. Outreach and follow-up of crisis contacts and
missed appointments.
f. Other activities as needed to address the
dyad’s identified treatment and/or support
needs.
[[page 409]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 409 of 642
c) Dyadic Psychoeducational Services for psychoeducational
services provided to the Child less than 21 years of age
and/or parent(s) or caregiver(s). These services must be
planned, structured interventions that involve presenting or
demonstrating information with the goal of preventing the
development or worsening of Behavioral Health conditions
and achieving optimal mental health and long-term
resilience.
d) Dyadic Family Training and Counseling for Child
Development for family training and counseling provided to
both the Child less than 21 years of age and parent(s) or
caregiver(s). These services include brief training and
counseling related to a Child’s behavioral issues,
developmentally appropriate parenting strategies,
parent/Child interactions, and other related issues.
e) Dyadic Parent or Caregiver Services
Dyadic parent or caregiver services are services delivered to
a parent or caregiver during a Child’s visit that is attended by
the Child and parent or caregiver, including the following
assessment, screening, counseling, and brief intervention
services provided to the parent or caregiver for the benefit of
the Child as appropriate:
i. Brief Emotional/Behavioral Assessment
ii. ACEs Screening
iii. Alcohol and Drug Screening, Assessment, Brief
Interventions, and Referral to Treatment
iv. Depression Screening of Health Behavior
Assessments and Interventions
v. Psychiatric Diagnostic Evaluation
vi. Tobacco Cessation Counseling
4) Family Therapy as a Behavioral Health Benefit
a) Family therapy is type of psychotherapy covered under
Medi-Cal’s NSMHS benefit, including for Members less than
21 years of age who are at risk for Behavioral Health
concerns and for whom clinical literature would support that
[[page 410]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 410 of 642
the risk is significant such that Family Therapy is indicated,
but may not have a mental health diagnosis. The primary
purpose of Family Therapy is to address family dynamics as
they relate to the Member’s mental status and behavior(s).
b) Family Therapy is composed of at least two family members
receiving therapy together provided by a mental health
Provider to improve parent/Child or caregiver/Child
relationships and encourage bonding, resolving conflicts,
and creating a positive home environment.
c) All family members do not need to be present for each
service. For example, parents or caregivers can qualify for
Family Therapy without their infant present, if necessary.
d) Both Children and adult Members can receive Family
Therapy mental health services that are medically
necessary. Contractor is required to provide Family Therapy
to the following Medi-Cal Members to improve parent/Child
or caregiver/Child relationships and bonding, resolve
conflicts, and create a positive home environment:
i. Members less than 21 years of age with a diagnosis
of a mental health disorder;
ii. Members less than 21 years of age with persistent
mental health symptoms in the absence of a mental
health disorder;
iii. Members less than 21 years of age with a history of at
least one of the following risk factors:
a. Neonatal or pediatric intensive care unit
hospitalization;
b. Separation from a parent or caregiver (for
example, due to incarceration, immigration, or
military deployment);
c. Death of a parent or caregiver of Foster home
placement;
d. Food insecurity, housing instability;
e. Maltreatment;
[[page 411]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 411 of 642
f. Severe and persistent bullying; and
g. Experience of discrimination, including but not
limited to discrimination on the basis of race,
ethnicity, gender identity, sexual orientation,
religion, learning differences, or disability;
iv. Members less than 21 years of age who have a
parent(s) or caregiver(s) with one or more of the
following risk factors:
a. A serious illness or disability;
b. A history of incarceration;
c. Depression or other mood disorder;
d. Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder or other
anxiety disorder;
e. Psychotic disorder under treatment;
f. SUD;
g. Job loss;
h. A history of intimate partner violence or
interpersonal violence; and
i. Is a teen parent.
e) Contractor must provide Family Therapy services if needed
to correct or ameliorate a Child’s mental health condition.
Services that sustain, support, improve, or make more
tolerable a mental health condition are considered to
ameliorate the condition and are thus covered as EPSDT
services.
f) Members less than 21 years of age may receive up to five
Family Therapy sessions before a mental health diagnosis is
required. Contractor must provide Family Therapy without
regard to the five-visit limitation for Members less than 21
years of age with risk factors for mental health disorders or
parents/caregivers with related risk factors, including
separation from a parent/caregiver due to incarceration,
immigration, or death; foster care placement; food insecurity;
[[page 412]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 412 of 642
housing instability; exposure to domestic violence or trauma;
maltreatment; severe/ persistent bullying; and discrimination.
5) Billing and Claims
a) Dyadic Services Providers must be reimbursed in
accordance with their Network Provider contract.
b) Contractor must not require Prior Authorization for Dyadic
Services.
c) Contractor must not establish unreasonable or arbitrary
barriers for accessing coverage.
d) Encounters for Dyadic Services must be submitted with
allowable current procedural terminology codes as outlined
in the Medi-Cal Provider Manual.
e) Multiple Dyadic Services are allowed on the same day and
may be reimbursed at the FFS rate.
f) The DBH well-Child visit must be limited to those services
that are not already covered in the medical well-Child visit,
and any other service codes cannot be duplicative of
services that have already provided in a medical well-Child
visit or a DBH well-Child visit.
g) Dyadic caregiver service codes (screening, assessment, and
brief intervention services provided to the parent or caregiver
for the benefit of the Child) may be billed by either the
medical well-Child Provider or the DBH well-Child visit
Provider, but not by both Providers, when the dyad is seen
on the same day by both Providers.
h) Tribal Health Programs, Rural Health Clinics (RHCs), and
Federal Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) are eligible to
receive their All-Inclusive Rate from Contractor if Dyadic
Services are provided by a billable Provider per APL 17-002
and APL 21-008.
i. Dyadic Services may be reimbursed at the FFS rate
established for services, if the service provided does
not meet the definition of a THP, RHC, or FQHC visit,
or exceeds frequency limitations.
[[page 413]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 413 of 642
ii. THP, RHC, and FQHC Providers can bill FFS for
Dyadic Services delivered in a clinical setting by
Provider types named in the Non-specialty Mental
Health Services: Psychiatric and Psychological
Services section of the Medi-Cal Provider Manual.
iii. THP, RHC, and FQHC Providers cannot double bill
for Dyadic Services that are duplicative of other
services provided through Medi-Cal.
iv. All Dyadic Services must be billed under the Medi-Cal
identity of the Member less than 21 years of age.
L. Practice Guidelines
Contractor must adopt practice guidelines in accordance with 42 CFR
section 438.236, and this Contract. Contractor’s decisions for Utilization
Management, Member education, provision of Covered Services, and
other areas covered by practice guidelines must be consistent with these
guidelines. Contractor must also provide their practice guidelines, upon
request, to Members and Potential Members.
M. Asthma Preventive Services
Contractor must ensure availability of Asthma Preventive Services (APSs),
including clinic-based and home-based asthma self-education, and in-
home environmental trigger assessments for all Members with a diagnosis
of asthma. APSs may be provided by a Physician or a Non-Physician
Medical Practitioner, or a licensed practitioner of the healing arts within
their scope of practice. APSs may also be provided by unlicensed
Providers, which may include CHW, who have met the qualifications of an
APS Provider and are providing these services under a supervising
Physician or Non-Physician Medical Practitioner, clinic, hospital, local
health jurisdiction, or community-based organization.
N. Community Health Workers Services
1) Contractor must ensure availability of CHW Services to all
Members that meet the eligibility criteria in accordance with 42 CFR
section 440.130(c).
2) Contractor must adhere to DHCS guidance on service definitions,
eligible populations, and CHW Provider parameters as stated in
APL 22-016.
[[page 414]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 414 of 642
a) CHW services are defined as preventive health services
delivered by a CHW to prevent disease, disability, and other
health conditions or their progression; to prolong life; and to
promote physical and mental health. CHWs may include
individuals known by a variety of job titles, such as
promotores, community health representatives, navigators,
and other non-licensed public health workers, including
violence prevention professionals, with the qualifications
specified below.
b) CHW services are considered Medically Necessary for
Members with one or more chronic health conditions
(including Behavioral Health) or exposure to violence and
trauma, who are at risk for a chronic health condition or
environmental health exposure, who face barriers in meeting
their health or health-related social needs, and/or who would
benefit from preventive services.
3) CHW Provider and Supervising Provider Requirements
a) Contractor must determine, verify, and validate CHW
Providers can provide CHW Services in an effective manner
consistent with culturally and linguistically appropriate care.
b) CHW Providers must have lived experience that aligns with
and provides a connection between CHW and the Member
population being served in.
c) CHWs must have lived experience that aligns with and
provides a connection between the CHW and the Member or
population being served. This may include, but is not limited
to, experience related to incarceration, military service,
pregnancy and birth, disability, foster system placement,
homelessness, mental health conditions or substance use,
or being a survivor of domestic or intimate partner violence
or abuse and exploitation. Lived experience may also
include shared race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender
identity, language, or cultural background with one or more
linguistic, cultural, or other groups in the community for
which the CHW is providing services.
d) Contractor must contract with a Supervising Provider to
oversee CHW providers and the services delivered to
Members. CHW providers can be supervised by a
community-based organization (CBO) or a local health
jurisdiction (LHJ) that does not have a licensed Provider on
[[page 415]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 415 of 642
staff in alignment with the Provider Manual and APL 22-
016.
e) Contractor must ensure that Network Providers and
Subcontractors contracting with or employing CHWs to
provide Covered Services have adequate supervision and
training.
f) Contractor must ensure CHW Providers demonstrate, and
Supervisor Providers maintain evidence of, minimum
qualifications through the CHW certificate pathway, Violence
Prevention certificate pathway, or Work experience pathway.
g) Certificate Pathway: CHWs demonstrating qualifications
through the Certificate Pathway must provide proof of
completion of at least one of the following certificates: o
CHW Certificate: A valid certificate of completion of a
curriculum that attests to demonstrated skills and/or practical
training in the following areas: communication, interpersonal
and relationship building, service coordination and
navigation, capacity building, advocacy, education and
facilitation, individual and community assessment,
professional skills and conduct, outreach, evaluation and
research, and basic knowledge in public health principles
and Social Drivers of Health (SDOH), as determined by the
Supervising Provider. 6 Certificate programs must also
include field experience as a requirement. A CHW Certificate
allows a CHW to provide all covered CHW services
described in this APL, including violence prevention
services.
h) Violence Prevention Professional Certificate: For individuals
providing CHW violence prevention services only, a Violence
Prevention Professional (VPP) Certificate issued by Health
Alliance for Violence Intervention or a certificate of completion
in gang intervention training form the Urban Peace Institute.
7,8 A VPP Certificate allows a CHW to provide CHW violence
prevention services only. A CHW providing services other than
violence prevention services must demonstrate qualification
through either the Work Experience Pathway or by completion
of a General Certificate.
i) Work Experience Pathway: An individual who has at least
2,000 hours working as a CHW in paid or volunteer positions
within the previous three years and has demonstrated skills
and practical training in the areas described above, as
[[page 416]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 416 of 642
determined and validated by the Supervising Provider, may
provide CHW services without a certificate of completion for a
maximum period of 18 months. A CHW who does not have a
certificate of completion must earn a certificate of completion,
as described above, within 18 months of the first CHW visit
provided to a Member.
j) Contractor must have a process for verifying qualifications
and experience of Supervising Providers, which must extend
to individuals employed by, or delivering CHW Services on
behalf of, the Supervising Provider.
k) Contractor must ensure Supervising Providers and CHW
Providers comply with all applicable State and federal laws
and regulations, Contract requirements, and other DHCS
guidance, including APLs and PLs.
O. Community Health Workers Provider Capacity
1) Contractor must ensure and monitor appropriate, adequate
Networks within its Service Area, including for CHW Services as
stated in APL 21-006.
2) Contractor must use data-driven approaches to determine and
understand priority populations eligible for CHW Services, including
but not limited to, using past and current Member
utilization/encounters, frequent hospital admissions or emergency
department visits, demographic and Social Drivers of Health data,
referrals from the community, and needs assessments.
P. Identifying Members for Community Health Workers
1) Contractor must require a referral for CHW Services submitted by a
Physician or other licensed practitioner of the healing arts within
their scope of practice under State law.
2) Contractor must accept recommendations for CHW Services from
other licensed practitioners, whether they are in the Network or out-
of-Network Providers, within their scope of practice, including
physician assistants, nurse practitioners, clinical nurse Specialists,
podiatrists, nurse midwives, Licensed Midwives, registered nurses,
public health nurses, psychologists, licensed marriage and family
therapists, licensed clinical social workers, licensed professional
clinical counselors, dentists, registered dental hygienists, licensed
educational psychologists, licensed vocational nurses, and
pharmacists.
[[page 417]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 417 of 642
Q. Cancer Biomarker Testing
Contractor must comply with APL 22-010 and cover Medically Necessary
biomarker testing for Members with advanced or metastatic stage 3 or 4
cancer and cancer progression or recurrence in the Member with
advanced or metastatic stage 3 or 4 cancer. Contract is prohibited from
imposing Prior Authorization requirements on biomarker testing that is
associated with a federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved
therapy for advanced or metastatic stage 3 or 4 cancer.
R. COVID-19 Coverage
Contractor must cover COVID-19 related services to include prevention,
testing, and treatment as detailed in APL 22-009.
5.3.8 Investigational Services
A. Contractor must cover investigational services as defined in 22 CCR
section 51056.1(b) when a service is determined to be investigational
pursuant to 22 CCR section 51056.1(c), and all requirements in 22 CCR
section 51303(h) are met and documented in the Member's Medical
Record.
B. Routine Patient Care Costs for Clinical Trials
1) Contractor must cover routine patient care costs for Members
participating in a qualifying clinical trial including items and services
furnished in connection with participation by Members in a
qualifying clinical trial pursuant to 42 USC section 1396d(a)(30),
and W&I section 14132.98. A qualifying clinical trial is a clinical trial
in any clinical phase of development that is conducted in relation to
the prevention, detection, or treatment of any serious or life-
threatening disease or condition.
2) Routine patient care costs are costs associated with the provision
of health care services, including drugs, items, devices, and
services that would otherwise be covered under the Medi-Cal
program if those drugs, items, devices, and services were not
provided in connection with an approved clinical trial program.
3) Coverage of routine patient care costs must be provided regardless
of geographic location or if the treating Provider or principal
investigator of the qualifying clinical trial is a Network Provider.
[[page 418]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 418 of 642
4) Coverage of routine patient care costs must be based on Provider’s
and principal investigator’s approval regarding the Member’s
appropriateness for the qualifying clinical trial.
5) The coverage determination must be expedited and completed
within 72 hours.
6) Contractor must require the submission of the “Medicaid Attestation
Form on the Appropriateness of the Qualifying Clinical Trial” for
approval of the clinical trial. The attestation form must include the
following information:
a) The Member’s name and client identification number;
b) The national clinical trial number;
c) A statement signed by the principal investigator attesting to
the appropriateness of the qualified clinical trial; and
d) A statement signed by the Provider attesting to the
appropriateness of the qualified clinical trial.
[[page 419]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 419 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
5.4 Community Based Adult Services
5.4.1 Covered Services
5.4.2 Coordination of Care
5.4.3 Required Reports for the Community Based Adult Services Program
5.4.4 Community Participation
5.4.5 Community Based Adult Services Program Integrity
[[page 420]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 420 of 642
5.4 Community Based Adult Services
5.4.1 Covered Services
In addition to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.3 (Scope of Services),
Contractor must cover Community Based Adult Services (CBAS) in accordance
with the California Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) 1115(a)
Demonstration, Number 11-W-00193/9 Special Terms and Conditions (STCs),
including Sections V.A.19 through 30 and Attachments H and S, or in
accordance with any subsequent demonstration amendment or renewal or
successive demonstration, waiver, or other Medicaid authority governing the
provision of CBAS. Contractor must cover CBAS and ensure provision of the
following services:
A. Arrange for the provision of CBAS to Members determined eligible to
receive CBAS core services, and additional services as needed, in
accordance with the CalAIM STCs Section V.A.20.a and b, Attachment H,
and Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.4.2.C. (Coordination of Care);
B. Consider a Member’s relationship with a previous Provider of services
similar to CBAS when referring a Member to a CBAS Provider;
C. Cover CBAS as a bundled service through a CBAS Provider or arrange for
the provision of unbundled CBAS based on the assessed needs of
Members eligible for CBAS if a certified CBAS Provider is not available or
not contracted, or there is insufficient CBAS Provider capacity in the area,
as required by Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.8.J. (Specific
Requirements for Access to Programs and Covered Services). Arranging
for unbundled CBAS services includes authorizing Covered Services and
coordinating with community resources to assist Members whose CBAS
Providers have closed, and Members who have similar clinical conditions
as CBAS Members, to remain in the community, in accordance with the
following requirements listed below.
1) Unbundled CBAS Covered Services are limited to the following:
a) Professional Nursing Services;
b) Nutrition;
c) Physical Therapy;
d) Occupational Therapy;
e) Speech and Language Pathology Services;
[[page 421]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 421 of 642
f) Nonmedical Emergency Transportation (NEMT) and Non-
Medical Transportation (NMT), only between the Member’s
home and the CBAS unbundled service Provider; and
g) Non-specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS) and
Substance Use Disorder (SUD) services that are Covered
Services;
2) Contractor must coordinate care for unbundled CBAS services that
are not Covered Services based on the assessed needs of the
Member eligible for CBAS, including:
a) Personal Care Services;
b) Social Services;
c) Physical and Occupational Maintenance Therapy;
d) Meals;
e) Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS); and
f) SUD Services
D. Ensure that Member access to Medicare Providers or services is not
impeded or delayed through Contractor's provision of CBAS; and
E. Ensure continuity of care, in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Section 4.3 (Population Health Management and Coordination of Care),
when Members switch Medi-Cal managed care plans and/or transfer from
one CBAS Provider to another.
F. Arrange for the provision of CBAS Emergency Remote Services (ERS), in
response to a Member’s needs, and in accordance with CalAIM STCs
Section V.A.21 and All Plan Letter (APL) 22-020. CBAS ERS must be
provided in alternative Service Locations and/or via Telehealth, including
telephone or virtual video conferencing, as clinically appropriate.
1) The circumstances for ERS are time-limited and vary based on the
unique and identified needs documented in the Member’s
Individualized Health and Support Plan (IHSP). Contractor must
assess Members at least every three months for ERS as part of the
reauthorization of the Member’s Individual Plan of Care (IPC) and
review for continued need for ERS.
[[page 422]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 422 of 642
2) Telehealth delivery of ERS must meet the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) requirements,
and the methodology must be approved by Contractor. Contractor
must demonstrate compliance with the Electronic Visit Verification
(EVV) System requirements for personal care services and home
health services in accordance with section 12006 of the 21st
Century CURES Act and APL 22-014.
3) Contractor must provide ERS under the following circumstances:
a) State or local emergencies as determined by DHCS or
Contractor, such as wildfires and power outages, to allow for
the provision of ERS prior or subsequent to an official public
health emergency declaration as determined by DHCS or
Contractor; and
b) Personal emergencies, such as time-limited illness or injury,
crises, or care transitions that temporarily prevent or restrict
Members enrolled in CBAS from receiving CBAS in-person
at the CBAS Provider location, subject to approval by
Contractor.
5.4.2 Coordination of Care
A. Contractor must provide continuity of care to Members through continued
access to a CBAS Provider with whom there is an existing relationship for
up to 12 months after Member Enrollment. This requirement includes out-
of-Network Providers if there are no Quality of Care issues and the
Provider will accept Contractor’s rate or the Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service
(FFS) rate, whichever is higher, as set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.12 (Continuity of Care for Seniors and Persons with
Disabilities).
B. Contractor must ensure that CBAS IPCs are consistent with the Members’
overall care plans and goals, based on Person-Centered Planning and
completed in accordance with the CalAIM STCs Section V.A.20.,
“Individual Plan of Care”.
C. Contractor must conduct the initial assessment and subsequent
reassessments for Members requesting CBAS in accordance with the
CalAIM STCs, Sections VIII.A.19.e and 23.b. In addition, Contractor must:
1) Within 30 calendar days from the initial eligibility inquiry request,
Contractor must conduct the CBAS eligibility determination using a
DHCS-approved assessment tool. CBAS eligibility determinations
must include a face-to-face review with the Member by a
[[page 423]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 423 of 642
Registered Nurse with level of care determination experience for
Members who have not previously received CBAS through
Contractor’s Medi-Cal Managed Care Health Plan. Contractor may
forgo a face-to-face review if Contractor determined that the
Member is clinically eligible for CBAS and needs an expedited start
date;
2) Develop and implement an expedited assessment process to
determine CBAS eligibility within 72 hours of receipt of a CBAS
authorization request for a Member in a hospital or Skilled Nursing
Facility (SNF) whose discharge plan includes CBAS, or who is at
high risk of admission to a hospital or SNF or faces an imminent
and serious threat to their health;
3) Conduct a reassessment, with family involvement, when
appropriate, and redetermination of the Member’s eligibility for
CBAS at least every six months after the initial assessment or up to
every 12 months when determined by Contractor to be clinically
appropriate. When a Member requests that services remain at the
same level or requests an increase in services due to a change in
their level of need, contractor may conduct the reassessment using
only the Member’s CBAS IPC, including any supporting
documentation supplied by the CBAS Provider;
4) Notify Members in writing of their CBAS assessment determination
in accordance with the timeframes identified in the CalAIM STCs,
Section VIII.A.23.b.i. Contractor’s written notice must be approved
by DHCS and include procedures for Grievances and Appeals in
accordance with current requirements identified in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal
System);
5) Require that CBAS Providers update a Member’s CBAS Discharge
Plan of Care and provide a copy to the Member and to Contractor
whenever a Member’s CBAS services are terminated. The CBAS
Discharge Plan of Care must include:
a) The Member’s name and ID number;
b) The name(s) of the Member’s Physician(s);
c) If applicable, the date the Notice of Action denying
authorization for CBAS was issued;
d) If applicable, the date the CBAS benefit will be terminated;
[[page 424]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 424 of 642
e) Specific information about the Member’s current medical
condition, treatments, and medications;
f) Potential referrals for Medically Necessary services and
other services or community resources that the Member may
need upon discharge;
g) Contact information for the Member’s Case Manager; and
h) A space for the Member or the Member’s representative to
sign and date the Discharge Plan of Care.
D. Contractor must coordinate with the CBAS Provider to ensure the
following:
1) CBAS IPCs are consistent with Members’ overall care plans and
goals developed by Contractor;
2) Timely exchange of the following coordination of care information:
Member Discharge Plan of Care, reports of incidents that threaten
the welfare, health and safety of the Member, and Significant
Changes in the Member’s condition;
3) Clear communication pathways between the appropriate CBAS
Provider staff and Contractor staff responsible for CBAS eligibility
determinations, service authorizations, and care planning, including
identification of the lead care coordinator for Members who have a
care team and Utilization Management; and
4) The CBAS Provider receives advance written notification and
training prior to any substantive changes in Contractor’s policies
and procedures related to CBAS.
E. In addition to the requirements for unbundled CBAS contained in Exhibit
A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.4.1 (Covered Services), and in accordance
with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.4.2 (Coordination of Care),
Contractor must coordinate care for unbundled CBAS that are not
Covered Services, based on the assessed needs of the Member eligible
for CBAS, including:
1) Personal Care Services
2) Social Services
3) Physical and Occupational Maintenance Therapy
[[page 425]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 425 of 642
4) Meals
5) SMHS
6) SUD services that are not Covered Services.
5.4.3 Required Reports for the Community Based Adult Services Program
Contractor must submit to DHCS the following reports 30 calendar days following
the end of each reporting period and in a format specified by DHCS:
A. How many Members have been assessed for CBAS and the total number
of Members currently receiving CBAS, either as a bundled or unbundled
service, on a quarterly basis;
B. Identification of CBAS Providers added to or deleted from Contractor's
Network, and when there is a 5% drop in capacity, in the quarterly
Network changes submission required in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.2.13.C. (Network Reports);
C. A summary of any complaints surrounding the provision of CBAS; and
D. Reports on the following areas:
1) Appeals related to requesting CBAS and the inability to receive
those services or receiving more limited services than requested;
2) Appeals related to requesting a particular CBAS Provider and the
inability to access that Provider;
3) Excessive travel times to access CBAS;
4) Grievances regarding CBAS Providers;
5) Grievances regarding Contractor assessment and/or
reassessment; and
6) Any reports pertaining to the health and welfare of Members
utilizing CBAS.
E. On an annual basis, Contractor must provide a list of its contracted CBAS
Providers and its CBAS accessibility standards.
5.4.4 Community Participation
[[page 426]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 426 of 642
Contractor must ensure that engagement and community participation for
Members receiving CBAS is supported to the fullest extent desired by each
Member.
5.4.5 Community Based Adult Services Program Integrity
Following a determination that a credible allegation of Fraud exists involving a
CBAS Provider, DHCS must notify Contractor of the finding promptly. In addition
to the actions required in APL 15-026, Contractor must report to DHCS, in a
timeframe and manner specified by DHCS but no less frequently than quarterly,
all payments made to the CBAS Provider involved in a credible allegation of
Fraud for CBAS benefits provided after the date of notification. DHCS may
recoup payments from Contractor in accordance with CalAIM Terms and
Conditions, GPR Section V.A.30.b.
[[page 427]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 427 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
5.5 Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Benefits
5.5.1 Mental Health Parity Requirements
5.5.2 Non-specialty Mental Health Services and Substance Use Disorder
Services
5.5.3 Non-specialty Mental Health Services Providers
5.5.4 Emergency Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services
5.5.5 Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services Disputes
5.5.6 No Wrong Door for Mental Health Services
[[page 428]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 428 of 642
5.5 Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Benefits
5.5.1 Mental Health Parity Requirements
Contractor must comply with all mental health parity requirements in 42 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) section 438.900 et seq. Contractor must ensure it is
not applying any financial or treatment limitation to mental health or Substance
Use Disorder (SUD) benefits in any classification that is more restrictive than the
predominant financial or treatment limitation applied to medical and surgical
benefits in the same classification.
5.5.2 Non-specialty Mental Health Services and Substance Use Disorder
Services
A. Non-specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS) set forth in Welfare and
Institutions Code (W&I) section 14189 are Covered Services in
accordance with W&I section 14184.402, unless otherwise specifically
excluded under the terms of this Contract. Contractor must consider equity
in the provision of such services.
B. Contractor must cover NSMHS including: individual and group mental
health evaluation and treatment, including psychotherapy, Family
Therapy, and Dyadic Services; psychological and neuropsychological
testing, when clinically indicated to evaluate a mental health condition;
outpatient services for the purposes of monitoring drug therapy;
psychiatric consultation; and outpatient laboratory, drugs, supplies, and
supplements. Contractor must cover hypnotherapy, health behavior
assessments and interventions, psychiatric collaborative care, and other
NSMHS services described in the Medi-Cal Provider Manual as mental
health evaluation and treatment NSMHS. Contractor must cover mental
health screening services described in the Medi-Cal Provider Manual as
NSMHS, including but not limited to adverse childhood experiences (ACE)
screening, brief emotional/behavioral assessments, depression screening,
general developmental screening, autism spectrum disorder screening,
and other screening services in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 5.5.2.F. (Non-specialty Mental Health Services and Substance
Use Disorder Services). Contractor must cover SUD services including:
drug and alcohol Screening, Brief Intervention and Referral to Treatment
(SBIRT) services; tobacco cessation counseling; medications for addiction
treatment (also known as medication-assisted treatment or MAT) when
delivered in Primary Care offices, emergency departments, inpatient
hospitals, and other contracted medical settings; and Medically Necessary
Behavioral Health Services. Covered NSMHS and SUD Services can be
delivered in person and via Telehealth/telephone as specified in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.1 (Covered Services).
[[page 429]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 429 of 642
C. If a Member is receiving NSMHS and is determined to meet the criteria for
Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS) as defined by W&I section
14184.402, Contractor must use DHCS-approved standardized transition
tools in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.5.2.K.
(Non-specialty Mental Health Services and Substance Use Disorder
Services) as required when Members who have established relationships
with contracted mental health Providers experience a change in condition
requiring SMHS. Likewise, if a Member is receiving SMHS and is
determined to meet the criteria for NSMHS as defined by W&I section
14184.402, Contractor must use DHCS-approved standardized transition
tools in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.5.2.K.
(Non-specialty Mental Health Services and Substance Use Disorder
Services) as required when Members who have established relationships
with SMHS Providers experience a change in condition requiring NSMHS.
Contractor must continue to cover the provision of NSMHS provided to a
Member concurrently receiving SMHS when those services are not
duplicative and provide coordination of care with the County Mental Health
Plan (MHP) in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
5.5.2.K. (Non-specialty Mental Health Services and Substance Use
Disorder Services). This provision does not preclude coverage of
Behavioral Health Services that are within the scope of practice of
licensed mental health care Primary Care Providers (PCPs) and mental
health care Providers in accordance with All Plan Letter (APL) 22-006 and
APL15-008.
D. For Members ages 21 and over who meet the criteria for NSMHS set
forth in the W&I section 14184.402(b)(2), Contractor must cover NSMHS
that are Medically Necessary Covered Services in accordance with W&I
section 14059.5. For Members ages 21 and over, Contractor must cover
SUD services that are Medically Necessary Covered Services in
accordance with W&I section 14059.5. Contractor’s coverage of NSMHS
and SUD services must comply with W&I section 14184.402(f).
E. For Members less than 21 years of age, Contractor must cover NSMHS
that are Medically Necessary Covered Services in accordance with W&I
section 14184.402(b)(2). For Members less than 21 years of age,
Contractor must cover SUD services that are Medically Necessary
Covered Services. Medical Necessity determinations for NSMHS and
SUD services must be made pursuant to W&I section 14059.5, and as
required pursuant to 42 United States Code (USC) section 1396dI. For
Members less than 21 years of age, NSMHS and Covered SUD services
are Medically Necessary if they are necessary to correct or ameliorate a
mental health or substance use condition discovered by an Early Periodic
Screening, Diagnosis and Testing (EPSDT) screening. NSMHS and SUD
services need not be curative or restorative to ameliorate a mental health
or substance use condition. NSMHS and SUD services that sustain,
[[page 430]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 430 of 642
support, improve, or make more tolerable a mental health or substance
use condition are considered to ameliorate the mental health or substance
use condition, and Contractor must cover them. Contractor’s coverage of
NSMHS and SUD services must comply with W&I section 14184.402(f).
F. Contractor must cover mental health and SUD screening, including, but
not limited to, tobacco, alcohol and illicit drug screening, in accordance
with American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Bright Futures Periodicity
Schedule and United States Preventive Services Taskforce (USPSTF)
grade A and B recommendations for adults; ACE screening; brief
emotional/behavioral assessments; depression screening; general
developmental screening; autism spectrum disorder screening; and SBIRT
Services. Contractor must develop and implement policies and procedures
for mental health and substance use screenings and services provided by
a PCP, including, but not limited to, provision of SBIRT Services, and
referrals for additional assessments and treatments as indicated by the
discovery of condition or potential conditions from screening services, as
required by Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsections 4.3.12 (Mental Health
Services) and 4.3.13 (Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Treatment
Services).
G. Contractor must cover a mental health assessment without requiring Prior
Authorization. Contractor must follow the authorization criteria
requirements outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 2.3 (Utilization
Management Program) of this Contract for authorizing additional mental
health and SUD services. Consistent with the No Wrong Door policies set
forth in W&I section 14184.402, Contractor must cover the assessment
and any NSMHS provided during the assessment period for any Member
seeking care, even prior to the determination of a diagnosis, even prior to
the determination of whether NSMHS criteria set forth in W&I section
14184.402(b)(2) are met, and even if the Member is later determined to
need SMHS and/or SUD services and is referred to the MHP or to the
County Department responsible for SUD treatment. Contractor must cover
NSMHS even if the service was not included in the individual treatment
plan, and even if the Member has a co-occurring mental health condition
and SUD.
H. Contractor must develop and implement policies and procedures for
tracking mental and Behavioral Health screenings, assessments, and
treatment services provided by licensed mental health care Providers.
I. Contractor must cover and pay for all mental health and SUD services that
are Medically Necessary Covered Services for the Member, including the
following:
[[page 431]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 431 of 642
1) Emergency room professional services as described in 22 CCR
section 53855 including all professional physical, mental, and
substance use treatment services, including screening
examinations necessary to determine the presence or absence of
an Emergency Medical Condition and, if an Emergency Medical
Condition exists, for all services Medically Necessary to stabilize
the Member;
2) Facility charges claimed by emergency departments per APL 22-
005 and Behavioral Health Information Notice (BHIN) 22-011;
3) All laboratory and radiology services necessary for the diagnosis,
monitoring, or treatment of a Member's mental health condition;
4) Non-Medical Transportation (NMT) services required by Members
to access Medi-Cal covered mental health services and SUD
services, in compliance with APL 22-008 and this Contract. These
services include, but are not limited to, SMHS, Drug Medi-Cal
(DMC) services, and Drug Medi-Cal Organized Delivery System
(DMC-ODS) services;
5) NMT services and, for Members less than 21 years of age, Non-
Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT) services, to and from
DMC services, DMC-ODS services, and SMHS, in compliance with
APL 22-008 and this Contract;
6) Medically Necessary Covered Services after Contractor has been
notified by a DMC, DMC-ODS, County Mental Health Plan (MHP),
or mental health Provider that a Member has been admitted to an
inpatient psychiatric facility, including an Institution for Mental
Diseases (IMD) as defined by 9 CCR section 1810.222.1,
regardless of the age of the Member. These services include, but
are not limited to:
a) The initial health history and physical examination required
upon admission, consultations, and any Medically Necessary
Covered Services; Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) room and
board when psychiatric nursing facility services are provided
to Members age 65 and over.
b) Contractor must not cover other inpatient psychiatric facility
room and board charges or other services that are
reimbursed as part of the inpatient psychiatric facility per
diem rate.
[[page 432]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 432 of 642
7) All Medically Necessary Medi-Cal covered psychotherapeutic
drugs, when administered in the outpatient setting as part of
medical services for Members not otherwise excluded under this
Contract. This includes reimbursement for Medically Necessary
Medi-Cal covered psychotherapeutic drugs administered by out-of-
Network Providers for Members not otherwise excluded under this
Contract;
8) Reimbursement to pharmacies for psychotherapeutic drugs must
be provided through the Medi-Cal Fee-For-Service (FFS) program.
To qualify for reimbursement under this provision, a pharmacy must
be enrolled as a Medi-Cal Provider in the Medi-Cal FFS program;
9) Contractor must not materially delay access to Covered Services
per Paragraphs 3), 4), and 5) above through the application of
Utilization Review controls, such as Prior Authorization, or by
requiring that Covered Services be provided through Contractor’s
Network, consistent with Contractor’s obligation to provide timely
Covered Services under this contract.
J. Contractor must use DHCS-approved standardized screening tools
(including standardized screening tools specific for adults and
standardized screening tools specific for Children and youth) to ensure
Members seeking mental health services who are not currently receiving
covered NSMHS or SMHS are referred to the appropriate delivery system
for mental health services, either in Contractor’s Network or the MHP’s
network, in accordance with the No Wrong Door policies set forth in W&I
section 14184.402(h) and specified in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.3.12 (Mental Health Services).
K. If a Member becomes eligible for SMHS while receiving covered NSMHS,
Contractor must continue the provision of non-duplicative, Medically
Necessary NSMHS even if the Member is simultaneously accessing
SMHS.
1) Contractor must enter into a MOU with the MHP in accordance with
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6 (MOUs with Local
Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third Parties) to
ensure Medically Necessary NSMHS and SMHS provided
concurrently are coordinated and non-duplicative.
2) Contractor must develop and implement written policies and
procedures to ensure that Members meeting criteria for SMHS and
as indicated by a DHCS-approved standardized transition tools
(including standardized transition tools specific for adults and
standardized transition tools specific for Children and youth) are
[[page 433]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 433 of 642
referred to the MHP in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.3.12 (Mental Health Services). Likewise, Contractor
must develop and implement written policies and procedures to
ensure that Members meeting criteria for NSMHS and as indicated
by a DHCS-approved standardized transition tools (including
standardized transition tools specific for adults and standardized
transition tools specific for Children and youth) are referred by the
MHP to Contractor in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.3.12 (Mental Health Services).
L. Contractor must make best efforts to ensure that a Member’s existing
mental health Provider is notified during an Urgent Care situation, when
possible. Contractor must allow the Member’s existing mental health
Provider to coordinate care with the MHP or emergency room personnel
for Urgent Care.
M. Contractor must develop and implement policies and procedures for the
provision of psychiatric emergencies during non-business hours.
N. Contractor must monitor and track utilization data for NSMHS as specified
in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.3.3 (Review of Utilization Data).
5.5.3 Non-specialty Mental Health Services Providers
A. In addition to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.1 (Access to
Network Providers and Covered Services), Contractor must increase the
number of NSMHS Providers within its Network as necessary to
accommodate anticipated Enrollment growth, which DHCS will evaluate
through the Network certification. Contractor may contract with any mental
health care Provider to provide services within their scope of practice. The
number of NSMHS Providers available must be sufficient to meet referral
and appointment access standards for routine care and must meet the
Timely Access Regulation per Health and Safety Code (H&S) section
1367.03, and 28 CCR section 1300.67.2.2, in accordance with the
requirements set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.2.3.D
(Network Composition). Contractor’s NSMHS Providers must support
current and desired service utilization trends for its Members.
1) Contractor must authorize and arrange for out-of-Network Providers
when the provider type is unavailable within time or distance
standards. Authorization of out-of-Network Providers in Contractor’s
Service Area(s) must be prioritized over authorization of out-of-
Network Providers in adjoining Service Area(s), unless an out-of-
Network Provider in an adjoining Service Area(s) is more
conveniently located for a Member or meets time or distance
standards.
[[page 434]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 434 of 642
2) Contractor may contract with a MHP to ensure access to NSMHS.
Contractor must develop and implement policies and procedures
for the secure exchange of Member Information with the MHP to
facilitate referrals and Care Coordination. The policies and
procedures must cover:
a) Sharing Protected Health Information (PHI) with the MHP for
SMHS and the County Department responsible for SUD
treatment, including when required by law, obtaining
Member authorization to release information that allows the
exchange of treatment history, active treatment, and health
information;
b) Data sharing agreements with the MHP for SMHS and the
County Department responsible for SUD treatment and,
when required by law, a Business Associate Agreement that
addresses the sharing of information related to mental health
services and SBIRT services; and
c) Collecting and reporting data on Members receiving Medi-
Cal NSMHS to the MHP.
B. Notwithstanding Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 2.2.13
(Credentialing and Recredentialing), if a NSMHS Provider is accredited by
the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA), Contractor may
deem the Provider credentialed or re-credentialed. Additionally, Contractor
must develop and maintain policies and procedures that ensure that the
credentials of licensed NSMHS Providers have been verified in
accordance with 42 CFR section 438.214 and APL 22-013.
C. Any time that a Member requires a Medically Necessary NSMHS that is
not available within the Network, Contractor must ensure timely access to
out-of-Network Providers and Telehealth Providers, in accordance with
H&S section 1367.03 and 28 CCR section 1300.67.2, as necessary to
meet NSMHS access requirements.
5.5.4 Emergency Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services
In addition to the requirements set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 5.6
(MOUs with Local Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third Parties),
Contractor must have a MOU with the MHP to refer Members in need of Urgent
Care and Emergency Services, including person-to-person telephone transfers,
to the county crisis program during their call center hours. The MOU must be
executed in accordance with the requirements specified in Exhibit A, Attachment
[[page 435]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 435 of 642
III, Sections 4.3 (Population Health Management and Coordination of Care) and
5.3 (Scope of Services).
5.5.5 Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services Disputes
If Contractor and an MHP cannot agree on the appropriate place of care,
disputes must be resolved pursuant to APL 21-013.
A. Contractor must enter an MOU with the MHP in accordance with Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.6.1 (MOU Purpose) to include a process for
resolving disputes between Contractor and the MHP that includes a
means for Members to receive Medically Necessary services, including
NSMHS, while the dispute is being resolved.
B. Pursuant to 9 CCR section 1850.525, Contractor must not delay the
provision of Medically Necessary services during the resolution of a
dispute between Contractor and MHP. Contractor must comply with the
rules set forth in 9 CCR section 1850.525 for determining the responsibility
for managing ongoing care and financial responsibility for services
provided to Members during the dispute period. When disputes concern
Contractor’s contention that the MHP is required to deliver SMHS to a
Member either because the Member’s condition would not be responsive
to physical health care based treatment or because the MHP has
incorrectly determined that the Member’s does not meet SMHS criteria,
Contractor must manage the care of the Member in accordance with 9
CCR section 1850.525 and APL 21-013 until the dispute is resolved.
C. Contractor must provide case management and Care Coordination for all
Medically Necessary services, including those services that are the
subject of a dispute between Contractor and an MHP.
D. Regardless of MOU status, Contractor and the MHP must adhere to the
routine dispute resolution process and expedited dispute resolution
process requirements set forth in APL 21-013.
E. If DHCS renders a decision for the dispute that includes a finding that
Contractor is financially liable to the MHP for services, Contractor must
comply with the requirements in 9 CCR section 1850.530. If necessary,
DHCS will enforce the decision, including withholding funds to meet any
financial liability.
F. Contractor must monitor and track the number of disputes with MHPs.
Upon request, Contractor must report all disputes to DHCS.
5.5.6 No Wrong Door for Mental Health Services
[[page 436]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 436 of 642
Contractor must implement policy to ensure that Members receive timely mental
health services without delay regardless of the delivery system where they seek
care, and are able to maintain treatment relationships with trusted Providers
without interruption.
A. Contractor must provide or arrange for the provision of the following
NSMHS:
1) Mental health evaluation and treatment, including individual, group,
and family psychotherapy.
2) Psychological and neuropsychological testing, when clinically
indicated to evaluate a mental health condition.
3) Outpatient services for purposes of monitoring drug therapy.
4) Psychiatric consultation, excluding separately billable psychiatric
drugs claimed by outpatient pharmacy Providers via Medi-Cal Rx.
5) Outpatient laboratory, drugs, supplies, and supplements.
B. Contractor must provide or arrange for the provision of the NSMHS listed
above for the following populations after screening:
1) Members ages 21 and over with mild to moderate distress, or mild
to moderate impairment of mental, emotional, or behavioral
functioning resulting from mental health disorders, as defined by
the current Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders;
2) Members who are less than 21 years of age, to the extent that they
are eligible for services through the EPSDT benefit as described in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 5.3.4.E (EPSDT Services) of
this Contract, regardless of the level of distress or impairment, or
the presence of a diagnosis; and,
3) Members of any age with potential mental health disorders not yet
diagnosed.
C. Contractor must cover and pay for emergency room professional services
as described in 22 CCR Section 53855.
D. In accordance with APL 21-014, Contractor must, in a Primary Care
setting, provide covered SUD services, including alcohol and drug
screening, assessments, brief interventions, and referral to treatment for
Members aged 11 years old and older, including Members who are
pregnant. Contractor must also provide or arrange for the provision of:
[[page 437]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 437 of 642
1) Medications for Addiction Treatment (MAT), also known as
medication-assisted treatment, provided in Primary Care, inpatient
hospital, emergency departments, and other contracted medical
settings; and
2) Emergency Services necessary to stabilize the Member.
E. Contractor must implement standardized Screening and Transition of Care
Tools for Medi-Cal Mental Health Services in accordance with APL 22-005
and APL 22-028. Contractor must update and align policies and
procedures and MOUs with mental health plans to ensure compliance and
communicate updates to Providers as necessary.
1) In accordance with APL 22-005, Members ages 21 and over must
be screened using the Adult Screening Tool and transitioned using
the Adult Transition of Care Tool.
2) In accordance with APL 22-005, Members less than 21 years of
age must be screened using the Youth Screening Tool and
transitioned using the Youth Transition of Care Tool.
F. Consistent with W&I section 14184.402(f) and APL 22-005, Contractor
must cover clinically appropriate and covered NSMHS prevention,
screening, assessment, and treatment services even when:
1) Services are provided prior to determination of a diagnosis, during
the assessment period, or prior to a determination of whether
NSMHS or SMHS access criteria are met;
2) Services are not included in an individual treatment plan;
3) The Member has a co-occurring mental health condition and SUD;
or
4) NSMHS and SMHS are provided concurrently, if those services are
coordinated and not duplicated.
[[page 438]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 438 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
5.6 MOUs with Local Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third
Parties
5.6.1 MOU Purpose
5.6.2 MOU Requirements
5.6.3 MOU Oversight and Compliance
[[page 439]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 439 of 642
5.6 MOUs with Local Government Agencies, County Programs, and Third
Parties
Memorandum of Understandings (MOUs) entered into pursuant to this Contract
and as set forth in All Plan Letters (APLs) are binding, contractual agreements
between Contractor and third parties that set forth the responsibilities and
obligations of Contractor and a third party, including Local Government Agencies,
county programs, and third-party entities, to coordinate and facilitate the
provision of Medically Necessary services to Members, sharing data, and as
applicable, avoiding the duplication of services where Members are served by
multiple parties.
5.6.1 MOU Purpose
Contractor must coordinate with Local Government Agencies (LGAs), county
programs, and third-party entities to ensure that Members receive all Medically
Necessary services even if those services are not the financial responsibility of
Contractor. In circumstances where Contractor is coordinating care and not
financially responsible for the care, Contractor must negotiate in good faith and
execute a MOU, incorporating all required provisions of this Contract, APLs, and
MOU templates and guidance, with the following Local Government Agencies,
county program and third-party entities and county programs to ensure Care
Coordination, data sharing, and non-duplicative services for Members.
Contractor and the LGAs, county programs, and third-party entities may
incorporate requirements in addition to any requirements set forth in this Contract
or any DHCS issued templates so long as such requirements do not conflict with
any required provision. Contractor must use good-faith efforts to consult with
persons who have direct experience with Members receiving services from the
below programs in the development of the MOU.
A. Contractor must execute MOUs with Local Health Departments (LHDs) in
each county within Contractor’s Service Area for the following programs
and services, at a minimum:
1) California Children’s Services (CCS);
2) Maternal and Child Health (MCH);
3) Tuberculosis (TB) Direct Observed Therapy (DOT);
4) For Community Health Worker (CHW) services, as appropriate; and
5) All other Medically Necessary services that are the responsibility of
LHDs, not otherwise specified.
[[page 440]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 440 of 642
B. Contractor must execute MOUs with Women, Infants, & Children (WIC)
agencies in each county within Contractor’s Service Area.
C. Contractor must execute MOUs with LGAs, such as the County Behavioral
Health Department and County Social Services Department, in each
county within Contractor’s Service Area to assist with coordinating the
following programs and services, at a minimum:
1) Specialty Mental Health Services (SMHS);
2) Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder (SUD) treatment services
including counties participating in the Drug Medi-Cal Organized
Delivery System (DMC-ODS); 3) In-Home Supportive Services
(IHSS).
D. Contractor must execute MOUs to coordinate programs and services for
Members with the following LGAs in each county within Contractor’s
Service Area, at a minimum:
1) Social services; and
2) Child welfare departments.
E. Contractor must execute MOUs to coordinate services provided by
Regional Centers (RCs) for persons with Developmental Disabilities in
accordance with APLs relevant to MOUs, including DHCS issued
templates.
F. By July 1, 2024 (or such later date determined by DHCS), Contractor must
execute MOUs with LGAs in each county within Contractor’s Service Area
to assist with coordinating, at a minimum, Targeted Case Management
(TCM).
G. By January 1, 2025 (or such later date determined by DHCS):
1) Contractor must collaborate with and execute MOUs with Local
Education Agencies (LEAs) in each county within Contractor’s
Service Area to ensure that Members’ Primary Care Provider (PCP)
cooperates and collaborates in the development of Individual
Education Plans (IEP) or Individual Family Service Plans (IFSP) as
required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 4.3.16 (School-
Based Services).
2) Contractor must collaborate and execute MOUs, with California
Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, county jails, and
youth correctional facilities.
[[page 441]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 441 of 642
H. Contractor must execute MOUs to coordinate programs and services for
Members with the following third-party entities in each county within
Contractor’s Service Area, at a minimum:
1) Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) program agencies;
2) Continuum of care programs;
3) First 5 county commissions.
5.6.2 MOU Requirements
A. MOUs must contain all the following components, at a minimum:
1) Identification of services that are the responsibilities of each party
under the MOU and the populations that are to be served;
2) Identification of the oversight responsibilities of each party,
including the designation of a responsible person and liaison by
each party, and notification to the other party of changes to the
responsible person and liaison;
3) Establishment of policies and procedures for eligibility, screening,
assessment, evaluation, Medical Necessity determination, and
referral systems;
4) Establishment of policies and procedures for coordinating Member
care between the parties, including but not limited to, referrals to
applicable Enhanced Care Management (ECM), Community
Supports and/or community-based resources;
5) Establishment of policies and procedures for the timely and
frequent exchange of Member Information and data, including
Behavioral Health and physical health data, maintaining the
confidentiality of exchanged information and data, and obtaining
Member consent;
6) Establishment of policies and procedures to address and document
Quality Improvement (QI) activities for services covered under the
MOU, including but not limited to, any applicable performance
measures and QI initiatives, reports that track cross-system
referrals, Member engagement, and service utilization;
7) Contractor must post on its website the date and time of the
quarterly meeting occurred, and, as applicable, distribute to
[[page 442]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 442 of 642
meeting participants a summary of any follow-up action items,
changes to processes, or Corrective Actions that are necessary to
fulfill obligations under this Contract and MOU.
8) Contractor must invite other party’s executives to participate in
quarterly meetings to facilitate appropriate committee
representation, including local presence, to discuss and address
Care Coordination and MOU-related issues.
9) Agreement by both parties, to the extent such non-Contractor party
will agree to participate in quarterly meetings to discuss Care
Coordination as well as systemic and case-specific concerns
including allowing Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors
to participate, as appropriate;
10) Establishment of policies and procedures detailing how complaints
can be raised and how to resolve disputes between the parties,
including but not limited to, a mutually agreed upon review process
to facilitate timely resolution of disputes, differences of opinion and
responsible entity for covering services until the dispute is resolved.
The review process must not result in delays in Member access to
services pending formal dispute resolution;
11) Establishment of policies and procedures regarding Member
access to Medically Necessary services and Network Providers
during non-business hours;
12) Policies and procedures for Member, Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, and Network Provider education related to access to
services covered under the MOU; and
13) Establishment of policies and procedures to address emergency
preparedness protocols in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and Response).
B. In addition to the MOU requirements listed in Paragraph A of this
Subsection, MOUs must contain the following components identified in
this Paragraph B, as applicable:
1) MOUs with County Mental Health Plans (MHPs)
a) The requirements contained in Welfare and Institutions Code
(W&I) section 14715;
[[page 443]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 443 of 642
b) Policies and procedures for the delivery of SMHS, including
the MHP’s provision of clinical consultation with Contractor
for Members being treated for mental illness;
c) Policies and procedures for the delivery of Medically
Necessary Non-specialty Mental Health Services (NSMHS)
within the PCP’s scope of practice;
d) Policies and procedures for the timely and frequent
exchange of Member information and data, including, as
applicable, Behavioral Health and physical health data,
maintaining the confidentiality of exchanged information and
data, and, if necessary, obtaining Member consent;
e) Policies and procedures for the delivery of Medically
Necessary Covered Services to Members who require
SMHS, including but not limited to:
i. Prescription Drugs when administered in an
outpatient setting and not otherwise excluded under
this Contract;
ii. Laboratory, radiological and radioisotope services;
iii. Emergency room facility charges and professional
services;
iv. Transportation;
v. Home health services;
vi. Drug Medi-Cal; and
vii. Medically Necessary Covered Services for Members
who are patients in psychiatric inpatient hospitals or
IMDs.
f) A provision that states any decision rendered by DHCS
regarding a dispute between Contractor and the MHP
concerning provision of Covered Services is not subject to
the dispute procedures specified in Exhibit E, Section 1.21
(Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements);
g) Policies and procedures to ensure Medically Necessary
NSMHS and SMHS provided concurrently are coordinated
and non-duplicative; and
[[page 444]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 444 of 642
h) Policies and procedures to ensure that Members meeting
criteria for SMHS and as indicated by a DHCS-approved
standardized transition tools (including standardized
transition tools specific for adults and standardized transition
tools specific for Children and youth) are referred to the MHP
in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
4.3.12 (Mental Health Services) and Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 5.5.2 (Non-specialty Mental Health Services
and Substance Use Disorder Services). Likewise, policies
and procedures to ensure that Members meeting criteria for
NSMHS and as indicated by a DHCS-approved standardized
transition tools (including standardized transition tools
specific for adults and standardized transition tools specific
for Children and youth) are referred by the MHP to
Contractor in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.3.12 (Mental Health Services) and Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.5.2 (Non-specialty Mental
Health Services and Substance Use Disorder Services).
i) Contractor must report to DHCS updates from quarterly
meetings in a manner and frequency specified by DHCS.
C. If Contractor reimburses the third-party entities or LGAs listed in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.6.1 (MOU Purpose) for services rendered,
Contractor must execute a Network Provider Agreement, Subcontractor
Agreement, and/or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement, as
appropriate, in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section 3.1
(Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements, and Contractor’s Oversight Duties).
D. Executed MOUs must be publicly posted.
E. MOUs must not be delegated, except that Contractor may delegate its
obligations under the MOU to a Fully Delegated Subcontractor or Partially
Delegated Subcontractor, provided that such Fully Delegated
Subcontractor or Partially Delegated Subcontractor is made a party to the
MOU.
5.6.3 MOU Oversight and Compliance
A. MOU Oversight Requirements
Contractor must have processes in place to maintain collaboration among
the parties to the MOU and identify strategies to monitor and assess the
effectiveness of MOUs as follows:
[[page 445]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 445 of 642
1) Conduct regular meetings, which include the designated individuals
responsible for oversight and performance under the MOU, at least
quarterly to address policy and practical concerns that may arise
between MOU parties;
2) Resolve conflicts between MOU parties within a reasonable
timeframe;
3) Designate a contact person to be responsible for the oversight and
supervision of the terms of any MOUs and notify DHCS within five
Working Days of any change to Contractor’s liaison or responsible
person as listed in the MOU;
4) Ensure Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers comply with any applicable provisions of the MOU;
5) Provide education and training of MOU as required by Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 5.6.2.A.12) above;
6) If DHCS requests a review of any existing MOU, Contractor must
submit the requested MOU within ten Working Days of receipt of
the request;
7) Ensure appropriate committee representation by inviting a local
presence in advance to each quarterly meeting an opportunity to
discuss and address Care Coordination and MOU-related issues
with county executives;
8) Ensure an appropriate level of leadership are invited to participate
in MOU engagements from both Contractor and entity as
appropriate; and
9) Report to DHCS updates from quarterly meetings in a manner and
frequency specified by DHCS through APLs and guidance.
B. MOU Compliance Requirements
1) At a minimum, executed MOUs listed in this Exhibit A, Attachment
III, Subsection 5.6.1 (MOU Purpose ) must be submitted to DHCS.
2) To the extent Contractor does not execute MOU within the
timeframe required under this Contract and relevant APLs,
Contractor must submit quarterly reports to DHCS documenting its
continuing good faith efforts to execute the MOU, until such time as
the MOU is executed. Documentation of good faith efforts must
[[page 446]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 446 of 642
include a description of attempts made to execute an MOU and the
explanation for why the MOU has not been executed.
3) Contractor, at a minimum, must review its MOUs annually for any
needed modifications or renewal of responsibilities and obligations
outlined within. Contractor must submit to DHCS’ Contract Manager
evidence of the annual review of MOUs as well as copies of any
MOUs modified or renewed as a result.
4) Contractor must report on its compliance with the MOU to
Contractor’s compliance officer at least on a quarterly basis.
[[page 447]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 447 of 642
Exhibit A, ATTACHMENT III
6.0 Emergency Preparedness and Response (To Become Effective on January
1, 2025)
This Article’s provisions, which will become effective on January 1, 2025, make explicit
DHCS’ commitment to ensuring that the Medi-Cal managed care delivery system is
prepared for those unforeseen circumstances that require immediate action.
Specifically, Contractors must plan for and ensure continuity of business operations,
delivery of essential care and services to Members, and mitigate potential harm caused
by Emergencies, such as a natural or manmade disaster or public health crisis. This
Article includes provisions requiring that Contractor must maintain an Emergency
Preparedness and Response Plan, including a Business Continuity Plan and Member
Emergency Preparedness Plan. In addition, during a federal, State, or county declared
state of Emergency, Contractor must implement protocols that allow Members timely
access to Covered Services including by allowing flexibility for Prior Authorization, pre-
certification, and referrals.
[[page 448]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 448 of 642
6.1 Emergency Preparedness and Response (To Become Effective on
January 1, 2025)
6.1.1 General Requirements
6.1.2 Business Continuity Emergency Plan
6.1.3 Member Emergency Preparedness Plan
6.1.4 California’s Standardized Emergency Management System
6.1.5 Reporting Requirements During an Emergency
6.1.6 DHCS Emergency Directives
[[page 449]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 449 of 642
6.1 Emergency Preparedness and Response
6.1.1 General Requirements
For the purposes of this Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and Response),
“Emergency” means unforeseen circumstances that require immediate action or
assistance to alleviate or prevent harm or damage caused by public health
crises, natural and man-made hazards, or disasters.
For the purposes of this Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and Response),
“Emergency Preparedness” means a continuous cycle of planning, organizing,
training, equipping, exercising, evaluating, and taking Corrective Action in an
effort to ensure effective coordination during incident response. Contractor’s
Emergency Preparedness process is one element of a broader national
preparedness system to prevent, respond to, and recover from public health
crises, natural disasters, acts of terrorism, and other disasters.
For the purposes of this Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and Response),
“Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan” means an Emergency plan put
in place by Contractor to ensure continuity of its business operations, to ensure
delivery of essential care and services to Members, and to help mitigate potential
harm caused by an Emergency.
This Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and Response) will not become
effective until January 1, 2025. Contractor must immediately comply with all
requirements in this Contract relating to this Article 6.0 (Emergency
Preparedness and Response) set out in Exhibit A, Attachment II, Article 1.0
(Operational Readiness Deliverables and Requirements) upon becoming
effective January 1, 2025. Nothing in this Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness
and Response) is intended to relieve Contractor of any other duties or
requirements that would otherwise apply, such as any duties or requirements
under federal and State laws and regulations relating to Emergency
Preparedness.
Contractor must have in place an Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
which includes, at a minimum
A. A Business Continuity Emergency Plan, as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 6.2 (Business Continuity Emergency Plan);
B. A Member Emergency Preparedness Plan, as described in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Section 6.3 (Member Emergency Preparedness Plan); and
C. Contractor’s policies and procedures for complying with all of the
requirements set forth in this Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and
Response).
[[page 450]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 450 of 642
Contractor must submit its Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan to
DHCS for approval prior to the start of Contractor’s operations. Contractor
mustsubmit any updates to deliverables identified in this Section to DHCS as
requested.
6.1.2 Business Continuity Emergency Plan
Contractor must have a Business Continuity Emergency Plan in place to deal
with any Emergency that may affect Contractor’s business operations, including,
but not limited to, access to Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors; communications; staffing; supplies; and information technology
concerns.
For the purposes of this Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and Response), a
“Business Continuity Emergency Plan” means a document consisting of the
critical information and processes Contractor needs to continue operating during
an Emergency.
Contractor must consider the availability of local resources and requirements
and, upon request, coordinate with local city and county Emergency
Preparedness programs when establishing its Business Continuity Emergency
Plan.
At a minimum, Contractor’s Business Continuity Emergency Plan must address
the following:
A. Communication
Contractor must describe how it will communicate with staff, Network
Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, DHCS, and other
essential persons and entities during an Emergency. Contractor must also
include how Contractor will provide Member, Network Provider,
Subcontractor, and Downstream Subcontractor access to call centers for
questions; how Contractor will provide dedicated staff and resources
toward the Emergency process; and how Contractor will address the
continual and timely resolution of claims. Contractor must maintain
Emergency contact information, telephone numbers, and other contact
information (including contact name, title or position, physical location
address, mailing address, telephone and/or cell phone, text, e-mail, and
social media) for staff, Network Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and other essential persons and entities. Contractor must
update this contact information as changes occur, but no less than every
six months.
[[page 451]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 451 of 642
B. Emergency Preparedness Risk Assessment
Contractor must identify and assess potential public health crises and
natural or man-made Emergencies, including, but not limited to,
epidemics, pandemics, earthquakes, fires, floods, storms, hurricanes,
tornados, power outages, gas leaks, bomb threats or presence of
explosives, explosions, hazardous materials incidents, relocations or
evacuations, assaults, intrusions, bioterrorism, injuries, riots, and
information technology security incidents that could arise at any location in
which Contractor conducts business operations under this Contract. When
assessing the risk of a potential Emergency, Contractor must consider the
likelihood of the Emergency within its Service Area and how the
Emergency may disrupt Contractor’s business operations. Contractor
must identify and assess any essential supply chain impacts that may
disrupt business operations during or after the Emergency. Contractor
must update its assessment as changes occur, but at least on an annual
basis.
C. Emergency Team Staffing and Responsibilities
1) Contractor must identify an Emergency team and back-up
Emergency team members to carry out Contractor’s Business
Continuity Emergency Plan in the event of an Emergency.
2) Contractor must clearly designate the Emergency team’s
responsibilities during an Emergency, including, but not limited to,
sending out Emergency communications to Contractor’s
employees, Network Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, Members, managing site security staff, those staff
responsible for securing utilities, and other essential persons and
entities.
3) Contractor must ensure that Emergency team members know how
to report their status to the Emergency team during and after an
Emergency to keep Contractor informed of changing needs.
D. Cooperative Arrangements
Contractor must attempt to establish cooperative arrangements with other
local health care organizations to assist and provide mutual aid during an
Emergency when business operations are affected. Contractor must
submit to DHCS an attestation that it will update its cooperative
arrangements at least annually and submit to DHCS.
E. Training and Drills
[[page 452]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 452 of 642
1) Contractor must establish an Emergency training program to train
new and existing staff on Contractor’s Business Continuity
Emergency Plan.
2) Contractor must conduct annual Business Continuity Emergency
Plan drills to ensure Emergency Preparedness and to detect
vulnerabilities that can be addressed before an actual Emergency
arises. Contractor must submit a report to DHCS within 30 calendar
days of each training drill which identifies drill activities, provides a
summary of outcomes, and creates a plan to address any
vulnerabilities found.
3) Contractor must, upon request, participate in mock disaster drills
coordinated by governmental entities, if available, to ensure
coordination during an Emergency.
4) Contractor must ensure that the equipment and supplies necessary
to sustain business operations are readily available in the event of
an Emergency.
F. Systems Recovery
1) Emergency Operation
Contractor must establish a plan to maintain critical business
processes that protects confidential and sensitive electronic and
non-electronic information, including, but not limited to, Protected
Health Information (PHI), personal information, and claims
information during an Emergency.
2) Data Backup
Contractor must establish procedures to backup confidential and
sensitive electronic information, including, but not limited to, PHI,
PI, and claims information to maintain the ability to retrieve such
information during an Emergency. Contractor must establish a
regular schedule for conducting backup procedures, storing backup
information offsite, updating an inventory of backup media, and
formulating an estimate for the time needed to restore lost
confidential and sensitive information. At a minimum, Contractor
must conduct a full backup process of its confidential and sensitive
electronic information on a weekly basis and update its offsite data
storage on a monthly basis.
6.1.3 Member Emergency Preparedness Plan
[[page 453]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 453 of 642
Contractor must establish a Member Emergency Preparedness Plan to address
its Members’ needs during an Emergency, including for Members in Long-Term
Care facilities, Skilled Nursing Facilities, or other institutional settings; and for
Members with disabilities, limitations in activities of daily living, and/or cognitive
impairments.
For the purposes of this Article 6.0 (Emergency Preparedness and Response), a
“Member Emergency Preparedness Plan” means a required subsection of the
Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan that details the required
coordination between Contractor and its Members, Network Providers,
Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors to ensure Member access to
health care services in the event of an Emergency.
At a minimum, Contractor’s Member Emergency Preparedness Plan must
address the following:
A. Member Communication
1) Contractor must have the ability to set up a Member services call
center for communication with Members before, during, and after
an Emergency.
2) Contractor must establish Emergency protocols for its Member
services call center. Protocols must include, but are not limited to,
call scripts that account for different Member needs, staff training in
crisis response, Contractor Emergency protocols that ensure
access to Covered Services, and processes for escalating a call
through warm hand-off connections to nurses or doctors for
Members needing immediate assistance.
3) During and post-Emergency, Contractor must:
a) Instruct Members about how to reach Contractor’s nurse
advice line, care coordinators, Medi-Cal Rx pharmacy
services, Telehealth services, and other Contractor services
and resources as deemed appropriate;
b) Notify Members about available alternative primary
pharmacy, dialysis center, chemotherapy or other infusion
therapy location, and other treatment sites;
c) Inform Members about how Contractor may modify its care
protocols and Member benefits to ensure continued access
to Medically Necessary services;
[[page 454]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 454 of 642
d) Provide Members with information on how to obtain medical
authorizations, out-of-Network care, medication refills or
Emergency supply, Durable Medical Equipment (DME) and
replacements, and Medical Records; and
e) Inform Members about how to access behavioral and mental
health services.
B. Continuity of Covered Services
1) Contractor must ensure that Members impacted by a federal, State,
or county declared state of Emergency continue to have access to
Covered Services. Contractor must take actions to ensure
continued access, including but not limited to the following:
a) Relaxing time limits for Prior Authorization, pre-certification,
and referrals;
b) Extending filing deadlines for Grievances and requests for
Appeal in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Section
4.6 (Member Grievance and Appeal System);
c) Coordinating, transferring, and referring Members to
alternate sources of care when Providers are closed, unable
to meet the demands of a medical surge, or otherwise
affected by an Emergency;
d) Authorizing Members to replace DME or medical supplies
out-of-Network;
e) Allowing Members to access appropriate out-of-Network
Providers if Network Providers are unavailable due to an
Emergency or if the Member is outside of the Service Area
due to displacement; and
f) Providing, when directed, a toll-free telephone number for
displaced Members to call with questions, including
questions about the loss of a Beneficiary Identification Card,
access to prescription refills, and how to access health care.
2) Contractor must establish policies and procedures to immediately
implement these actions as necessary or as directed by DHCS.
C. Network Provider, Subcontractor, and Downstream Subcontractor
Emergency Requirements
[[page 455]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 455 of 642
1) Education
a) Contractor must educate Network Providers, as a part of
training in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 3.2.5 (Network Provider Training);
Subcontractors; and Downstream Subcontractors on
Contractor’s Emergency policies and procedures.
b) Contractor must provide Network Providers, Subcontractors,
and Downstream Subcontractors with an Emergency
Preparedness fact sheet and resources on general
Emergency Preparedness, response, and communications
protocols.
2) Communications During an Emergency
a) Contractor must have a system and process in place to be
able to provide and receive information from Network
Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors
during an Emergency.
b) Contractor musthave a process in place to inform Network
Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors
about what modifications need to be implemented during an
Emergency to ensure that Members are able to access
Covered Services, and how Contractor can assist Network
Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream Subcontractors
in those efforts.
3) Network Provider Agreements
a) Contractor’s Network Provider Agreements must state that
Network Providers are required to:
i. Annually submit evidence of adherence to Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Emergency
Preparedness Final Rule (FR), 81 FR 63859, and 84
FR 51732;
ii. Advise Contractor as part of the Network Provider’s
Emergency plan; and
iii. Notify Contractor within 24 hours of an Emergency if
the Network Provider closes down, is unable to meet
the demands of a medical surge, or is otherwise
affected by an Emergency.
[[page 456]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 456 of 642
6.1.4 California’s Standardized Emergency Management System
A. Contractor must cooperate with local city and county Emergency
Preparedness programs within Contractor’s Service Area to ensure
provision of health care services.
B. Contractor must, upon request, educate and prepare staff on the
California State Emergency Plan and prepare staff to participate in
California’s Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS).
C. Contractor must maintain contact information for local city and county
Emergency Preparedness programs within Contractor’s Service Area.
D. Contractor must ensure that its medical director and Grievance and
Appeals coordinator are able to receive communications from the
California Health Alert Network and the California State Warning Center.
6.1.5 Reporting Requirements During an Emergency
A. Within 24 hours of a federal, State, or county declared state of Emergency
located within Contractor’s Service Area, Contractor must notify DHCS as
to whether Contractor has experienced or expects to experience any
disruption to its operations.
B. At a minimum, Contractor must report the status of its operations once a
day to DHCS, or as directed by DHCS.
C. Contractor’s daily report to DHCS must include, at a minimum, the
following information:
1) The number of Members in Contractor’s Service Area affected by
the Emergency, per county, including the number of medium-to-
high health risk Members, as identified through the Population
Needs Assessment;
2) Information, to the extent available, relating to Network Provider
site closures, including:
a) The number of Network Provider site closures by Provider
type, per county;
b) The number of Members served by each closed Network
Provider, per county;
[[page 457]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 457 of 642
c) The number of hospitalized Members who need to be
transferred;
d) The location(s) of where Members were transferred; and
e) For each closed Network Provider, a list of the alternative
Providers or facilities where Members can receive care.
3) The number of Contractor offices that are closed;
4) How Contractor is communicating with impacted Members,
Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors;
5) The actions Contractor has taken or will take to meet the continued
health care needs of its Members; and
6) The Network Provider, Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor,
or Member issues Contractor has received.
D. Contractor must comply with any guidance from the California Health and
Human Services Agency regarding reporting on the status of Contractor’s
operations during an Emergency.
6.1.6 DHCS Emergency Directives
When a federal, State, or county Emergency is declared, Contractor agrees that
DHCS may, in its sole discretion, waive existing contractual requirements and
institute new contractual requirements to address an Emergency pursuant to an
Emergency directive. DHCS Emergency directives do not require an amendment
to this Contract prior to implementation. Emergency directives to Contractor may
be communicated through All Plan Letters, advisory memos, or other similar
announcements and are effective when published. Unless otherwise stated,
Emergency directives will remain in effect until the Emergency directive is
terminated. Contractor must promptly comply with all DHCS Emergency
directives.
[[page 458]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 458 of 642
Exhibit A, Attachment III
7.0
Operations Deliverables and Requirements
To demonstrate the requisite capabilities necessary to execute the obligations of
this Contract, DHCS outlines specific deliverables that Contractor must submit to
DHCS prior to the implementation of the Contract. This period is considered the
Implementation Period at which time DHCS will assess the Medi-Cal managed
care plan’s readiness to begin operations as a Contractor. These deliverables
are identified and set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment II, Section 1.0 (Operational
Readiness Deliverables and Requirements) of the Contract and the tables that
follow that Section.
This Article provides a non-exhaustive list of deliverables required to be
submitted by Contractor to the DHCS and/or other entity(ies) throughout the term
of the Contract to verify Contractor’s continued compliance with Contract
requirements. Contractor must submit all required deliverables to DHCS in a
complete, accurate, and timely fashion. Contractor must submit all required
deliverables to DHCS in an ADA-compliant format if identified in the tables below
this section as publicly available. Contractor may be responsible for additional
deliverable requirements based on changes in State and federal law and/or
DHCS program needs. Contractor must meet any additional requirements, not
listed in the tables below, upon DHCS’ request and in the form and manner
specified by DHCS. Contractor must use the calendar year to define annual,
monthly, and quarterly submission timeframes unless directed otherwise.
In the event Contractor fails to submit any deliverables in accordance with the
milestones and timeframes required by DHCS, DHCS may impose Sanctions
and Liquidated Damages in accordance with Exhibit E, Section 1.19 (Sanctions)
and Section 1.20 (Liquidated Damages) to Contractor.
[[page 459]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 459 of 642
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT I – 1.0 DEFINITIONS
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Article.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT I – 2.0 ACRONYMS
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Article.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT II – 1.0 OPERATIONAL READINESS DELIVERABLES
AND REQUIREMENTS
See specific contract Sections below for details.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 1.1 PLAN ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0001 Key Personnel
Disclosure
Form
1.1.2 Annually. DHCS
D.0114
Medical
Director
Information
1.1.6 Attest to DHCS that
this has been
posted no later than
January 1 of each
year.
Posted in an
easily
accessible
location on
Contractor’s
Provider
portal
website.
Public
D.0002 Key Personnel
Change
Notification
including CEO,
CFO, COO,
CMO, Chief
Medical
Director, Health
Equity Officer,
Compliance
Officer, and
Government
Relations
Person.
1.1.8 Within ten calendar
days
Within 20 calendar
days.
Contractor
must post
Medical
director
contact
information
on their
provider
portal
website.
DHCS;
Public
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 1.2 FINANCIAL INFORMATION
[[page 460]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 460 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0003 Monthly
Financial
Reports
1.2.2 Monthly, no later
than 30 calendar
days after the close
of Contractor’s fiscal
month.
Financial
Reports
submitted in
accordance
with this
Section 1.2
are public
records and
may be
made public
by DHCS.
DHCS
D.0004 Quarterly
Financial
Reports
1.2.2 Quarterly, no later
than 45 calendar
days after the close
of Contractor’s fiscal
quarter.
DHCS
D.0005 Annual
Financial
Reports
1.2.2 Annually, no later
than 120 calendar
days after the close
of Contractor’s
Fiscal Year.
DHCS
D.0006 Annual
Forecasts
1.2.2 Annually, no later
than 60 calendar
days prior to the
beginning of
Contractor’s next
Fiscal Year.
DHCS
D.0007 Independent
Financial Audit
Report
1.2.3 Annually, no later
than 120 calendar
days after the close
of Contractor’s
Fiscal Year.
DHCS
[[page 461]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 461 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0008 Medical Loss
Ratio
Report(MLR)
1.2.5;
1.2.5.H
Annually
Timeframe and
manner determined
by DHCS, but no
longer than 12
months after the end
of the MLR reporting
year; and
When there is a
retroactive change
to the Capitation
Payments for a MLR
reporting year and a
new report needs to
be submitted to
reflect the change.
DHCS
D.0009 Community
Reinvestment
Plan
1.2.7 Annually. Posted on
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS
D.0010 Community
Reinvestment
Report
1.2.7 Annually. Posted on
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 1.3 PROGRAM INTEGRITY AND COMPLIANCE
PROGRAM
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0115 Compliance
Program
1.3.1.A
.9)
Annually. On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS
D.0011 Preliminary
Fraud, Waste,
and Abuse
Reports
1.3.2.D
.1)
Within ten Working
Days of Contractor’s
discovery of such
Fraud, Waste, or
Abuse.
DHCS
D.0012 Completed
Fraud, Waste,
1.3.2.D
.2)
Within ten Working
Days of completing
DHCS
[[page 462]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 462 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
and Abuse
Investigation
Report
Contractor’s Fraud,
Waste, or Abuse
investigation.
D.0013 Quarterly
Fraud, Waste,
Abuse Status
Report
1.3.2.D
.3)
Quarterly, ten
Working Days after
the close of every
calendar quarter.
DHCS
D.0014 Suspended,
Excluded, or
Ineligible
Provider
Notification
1.3.4.A
.6)
Within ten Working
Days of removing a
suspended,
excluded, or
ineligible Provider
from its Network.
DHCS
D.0116 Disclosures 1.3.5.C Within 60 calendar
days of when it has
identified any
Capitation
Payments or other
payments it has
received or paid in
excess of the
amounts specified in
this Contract.
D.0126 Overpayment
Notification of
$25 million or
more
1.3.6.A Within 60 calendar
days of the date the
overpayment.
DHCS
D.0131 Overpayment
Notification of
any amount
related to
Fraud, Waste,
and Abuse
1.3.6.A Within 10 calendar
days of the date the
overpayment.
DHCS
D.0106 Overpayment
Recoveries
Report
1.3.6.B Annually. DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 2.1 MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
[[page 463]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 463 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0015 Encounter
Data
Reporting
2.1.2 Within 60 calendar
days of the date of
adjudication of a
claim or receipt of
an Encounter as
required by this
Contract or as
otherwise agreed
upon by DHCS, or
as mandated
through federal
law;
Within six Working
Days of the end of
each month
following the
month of payment.
DHCS
D.0017 Network
Provider
Data
Reporting
2.1.4 Within ten calendar
days following the
end of each month.
DHCS
D.0018 Program
Data
Reporting
2.1.5 Within ten calendar
days following the
end of each month.
DHCS
D.0019 Template
Data
Reporting
2.1.6 On a regular basis,
or as mandated
through federal
law.
DHCS
D.0020 Management
Information
System/Data
Audits
2.1.7 No less frequently
than once every
three years.
DHCS
[[page 464]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 464 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0016 Data
Corrective
Action Plans
2.1.8 Within 15 calendar
days from the date
of the DHCS
written notice to
Contractor
regarding any
deficiencies and
problem related to
Contractor’s data
or its Management
and Information
System (MIS).
DHCS may
publicly
disclose on
the DHCS
website
any
Contractors
that have
entered
into
Corrective
Action
plans, or
that have
been
subject to
sanctions
due to non-
compliance
.
DHCS; public
D.0117 Tracking
Member
Alternative
Format
Selections
2.1.9 As Requested by
Member in
accordance with
the requirements in
All Plan Letter
(APL) 22-002.
DHCS
[[page 465]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 465 of 642
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 2.2 QUALITY IMPROVEMENT AND HEALTH
EQUITY TRANSFORMATION PROGRAM
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0021 Written
summary of
Quality
Improvement
and Health
Equity
Committee
(QIHEC)
activities, as
well as the
QIHEC
activities of
Fully Delegated
Subcontractors
and
Downstream
Fully Delegated
Subcontractors
2.2.3.D At least quarterly. On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0022 Quality
Improvement
and Health
Equity Plan
2.2.7 Annually. On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0026
NCQA Health
Plan
Accreditation
and Health
Equity
Accreditation
results
2.2.8
After every NCQA
accreditation cycle
(every 3 years).
Within 30 calendar
days of the receipt
of the completed
report from NCQA.
Within 15 calendar
days of confirmation
of the site visit by
NCQA.
DHCS
[[page 466]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 466 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0024 Health plan
Subcontractor
and
Downstream
Subcontractor
quality and
health equity
performance
data
2.2.9.A
.2
Annually (and as
requested by
DHCS).
DHCS
D.0023 Performance
Improvement
Project
reporting
2.2.9.B At intervals
determined by
DHCS.
At least annually.
On the
DHCS
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0025 Consumer
Assessment of
Healthcare
Providers and
Systems
(CAHPS)
Survey results
and CAHPS
results for its
Fully Delegated
Subcontractors
and
Downstream
Fully Delegated
Subcontractors
2.2.9.C Annually after
January 1, 2026.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0141
EPSDT/AAP
Bright Futures
annual
attestation for
mailing/electron
ically sharing of
DHCS supplied
Medi-Cal for
Kids and Teens
Materials
2.2.10.
B.2
Annually, by
January 15th.
Yes Eligible
Members
under the
age of 21.
New
Members
within 7
calendar
days of
Enrollment
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 2.3 UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
[[page 467]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 467 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0027 Appeals
Procedure
2.3.1.F As needed when
updated.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 3.1 NETWORK PROVIDER AGREEMENTS,
SUBCONTRACTOR AGREEMENTS, DOWNSTREAM SUBCONTRACTOR
AGREEMENTS, AND CONTRACTOR’S OVERSIGHT DUTIES
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0132 Network
Provider
Agreement
Template
3.1.2.A
.1
When updated or
when a new
provider type
DHCS
D.0133 Subcontractor
Agreement
Template
3.1.2.B
.1.a
When updated or
when a new
provider type
DHCS
D.0134 Updates to
Fully Delegated
Subcontractor
Agreements
Template with
Fully Delegated
Downstream
Subcontractors
3.1.2.B
.1.a
As needed when
updated
DHCS
[[page 468]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 468 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0135 Updates to
Fully Delegated
Executed
Subcontractor
Agreements
with Fully
Delegated
Downstream
Subcontractors
3.1.2.B
.1.b
As needed when
updated
DHCS
D.0028 Delegation
Reporting and
Compliance
Plan
3.1.3;
Exh. J
Annually and at any
time there is a
material change as
specified by DHCS
within 30 calendar
days from either the
beginning of the
annual reporting
period or the
material change.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0029 Non-Federally
Qualified HMOs
Subcontractor
Agreement,
Downstream
Subcontractor
Agreement,
and Network
Provider
Amendment
Approval
Request
3.1.5 At least 30 calendar
days before the
effective date,
unless otherwise
instructed by DHCS
Within 60 calendar
days after the date
the overpayment
was identified.
DHCS
D.0030 Federally
Qualified HMOs
Network
Provider
Agreement,
Subcontractor
Agreement, or
Downstream
Subcontractor
Agreement
3.1.8 Upon DHCS
request.
DHCS
[[page 469]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 469 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0031 Termination
Notice of
Network
Provider
Agreement with
a Safety-Net
Provider
3.1.8 As needed, at least
60 calendar days
prior to the effective
date of termination
or concurrently with
the termination if
Provider’s license
has been revoked or
suspended or where
the health and
welfare of a Member
is threatened.
DHCS
D.0118 Provider
Selection
3.1.10 Upon request. DHCS
D.0119 Delegation
Model
3.1.12 On
Contractor’s
website
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 3.2 PROVIDER RELATIONS
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0032 Provider
Dispute
Resolutions
Report
3.2.2 Annually. DHCS
D.0033 Most current
Provider
Manual
3.2.4 As needed.
Annually.
Available to
the Provider
through
Provider
portals, the
Internet or
upon
request.
Providers
D.0034 Hospital
Inpatient Days
Report
3.2.8 As required by
Welfare and
Institutions Code
(W&I) section
14105.985(b)(2).
Within 30 calendar
days of DHCS’
request.
DHCS
[[page 470]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 470 of 642
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 3.3 PROVIDER COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENTS
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0035 Alternative and
Value-Based
Payment
Models Report
3.3.1.B
C
Within 90
calendar days of
DHCS’ request.
Annually.
DHCS
D.0036 Financial
Incentive
Programs
Report
3.3.3 As specified by
DHCS.
DHCS
D.0037 Identification of
Responsible
Payor
3.3.4 Upon request and
in a manner
prescribed by
DHCS.
DHCS’ fiscal
intermediary
(FI) contractor
D.0038 Documentation
of services for
Contractor’s
Federally
Qualified
Health Center
(FQHC) and
Rural Health
Clinic (RHC)
Network
Provider
Agreements
3.3.7.B Within 30
calendar days of
DHCS’ request.
DHCS
D.0039 Certification of
Terms and
Conditions for
Network
Provider
Agreements
with FQHCs
and RHCs
3.3.7.B Within 30
calendar days of
DHCS’ request.
DHCS
D.0040 FQHC and
RHC Network
Provider
Agreements
3.3.7.B Whenever any
Network Provider
Agreements are
executed or
amended.
DHCS
[[page 471]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 471 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0041 Disputed
Emergency
Services/Post-
Stabilization
Care Claims
3.3.16 As needed.
Within 30
calendar days of
the effective date
of a decision that
Contractor is
liable for payment
of a claim.
DHCS - Office
of
Administrative
Hearings and
Appeals
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.1 MARKETING
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0042 Request to
Conduct
Activity Outside
of Contract
Requirements
4.1.2 As needed, at least
30 calendar days
prior to the
Marketing event.
DHCS
D.0043 Updates to
Marketing
Representative
Training and
Certification
Program
4.1.1 Prior to
implementation.
DHCS
D.0044 Marketing
Materials
4.1.2 Prior to distribution.
At least 30 calendar
days prior to the
Marketing activity,
unless DHCS
agrees to a shorter
review period.
DHCS
D.0045 Marketing Plan 4.1.2 Annually.
When there are any
changes made to
Contractor’s
Marketing plan.
DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.2 ENROLLMENTS AND DISENROLLMENTS
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Section.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.3 POPULATION HEALTH MANAGEMENT AND
COORDINATION OF CARE
[[page 472]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 472 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0046 Population
Health
Management
Strategy
4.3.1 Annually. DHCS
D.0047 Population
Needs
Assessment
4.3.2 At least every three
years.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0048 Managed Care
Liaison
Change
Notification
4.3.24 Within five days of
the change.
DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.4 ENHANCED CARE MANAGEMENT
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0049 Enhanced Care
Management
Model of Care
(MOC)
4.4.5 Contractor must
submit to DHCS any
Significant changes
to its MOC for
DHCS review and
approval at least 60
calendar days in
advance of any
occurrence of
changes or updates,
in accordance with
DHCS policies and
guidance, including
APLs.
DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.5 COMMUNITY SUPPORTS
[[page 473]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 473 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0050 Community
Supports Model
of Care
4.5.5 Contractor must
submit to DHCS any
changes to its
Community
Supports MOC for
DHCS review and
approval at least 60
calendar days in
advance of any
occurrence of
changes or updates,
in accordance with
DHCS policies and
guidance, including
APLs.
DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 4.6 MEMBER GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL SYSTEM
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0051 Receipt of
StandardStand
ard Grievances
4.6.2.E Within five calendar
days of receipt of
the Grievance.
Member
who filed a
Grievance
[[page 474]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 474 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0052 Discrimination
Grievance
Information
4.6.3.C Within ten calendar
days of mailing a
Discrimination
Grievance
resolution letter.
Contractor must
also submit annual
attestation 2nd
Friday of December
indicating MCP
submitted
appropriate
grievance
information to OCR
within10 calendar
days of mailing
Discrimination
Grievance
resolution letter.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS -
Office of
Civil Rights;
DHCS
D.0053 Sample Notice
of Action
(NOA) Letter
4.6.4.C
4.6.4.E
.3
Within 30 calendar
days from receipt of
information that is
reasonably
necessary to make
a determination.
No later than 60
calendar days from
the date on the
NOA.
DHCS
D.0054 Grievance
Logs
4.6.9 Upon DHCS
request.
DHCS
and/or CMS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.1 MEMBER SERVICES
[[page 475]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 475 of 642
ID Deliverable Title Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0056 Nondiscrimination
Notice and
Language
Taglines
5.1.3 Prior to use. On
Contractor’s
website –
accessible
from
Contractor’s
home page.
DHCS
D.0057 Member
Information -
Provider Directory
5.1.3 Prior to initial
Operations;
Monthly;
Every six months;
and When
Contractor updates
the Provider
Directory.
One week after
Contractor receives
updated provider
information.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0058 Member
Information -
Member
Handbook/Eviden
ce of Coverage
(EOC)
5.1.3 Before distribution
to Members;
When updated; or
Other timeframes
provided by DHCS.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS
D.0129 EOC Attestation-
Notification to
DHCS that the
EOC has been
mailed and/or
posted on the
MCP Contractor’s
Website.
5.1.3 Annually, by
January 1.
On
Contractor’s
website
DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.2 NETWORK AND ACCESS TO CARE
[[page 476]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 476 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0059 Alternative
Access
Standard
Requests
5.2.5 At least annually
and when
Contractor is unable
to comply with the
time or distance
standards set forth
in W&I section
14197.04.
Contractor’s
website for
Contractor
specific
results and
the DHCS
website with
statewide
results.
DHCS
D.0060 Network and
Access
Changes to
Covered
Services
5.2.9.A When Contractor
discovers a
Provider-initiated
termination
impacting more than
2,000 Members;
When Contractor
discovers a
Provider-initiated
termination that
affect Contractor’s
ability to meet
network adequacy
standards;
When there is a
change in the
availability or
location of Covered
Services; and
Within ten calendar
days of Contractor
discovering a
Provider’s
exclusionary status
from any database
or list.
DHCS
[[page 477]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 477 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0061 Notification
regarding
Community
Based Adult
Services
(CBAS)
Network
Provider
5.2.9.A When Contractor is
unable to contract
with a certified
CBAS Provider;
Upon termination of
a CBAS Network
Provider
Agreement; and
Within five Working
Days of Contractor’s
decision to exclude
a CBAS Provider
from its Network.
DHCS
D.0062 Notification
regarding
Long-Term
Care (LTC)
Network
Provider
5.2.9.A
.4
Within 60 calendar
days of termination
of a LTC Provider;
Immediately if the
termination is a
result of LTC
Provider
decertification by
CDPH; and
Within 72 hours of
applicable
termination of a LTC
Provider.
DHCS
D.0063 Member Notice
regarding
Provider
Termination
5.2.9.B Prior to its release to
Members.
DHCS
D.0064 Community
Advisory
Committee
(CAC)
Demographic
Report
5.2.11 Annually, by April
1st.
DHCS
D.0065 CAC meeting
notices
5.2.11 30 days prior to
each quarterly CAC
meeting, but in no
event later than 72
hours prior to each
meeting.
On
Contractor’s
website.
Public
[[page 478]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 478 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0066 CAC meeting
minutes
5.2.11.
E.3)d)
No later than 45
calendar days after
each quarterly
meeting.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
D.0067 Network
Certification
Report
5.2.13 At least annually. On the
DHCS
Website.
DHCS
D.0068 Notification of
Significant
Change to
Network
5.2.13.
B
Any time there is a
Significant Change
to Contractor’s
Network that affects
Network capacity
and Contractor’s
ability to provide
health care services.
DHCS
D.0069 Network
Change Report
5.2.13 30 calendar days
following the end of
the reporting
quarter.
DHCS
D.0112 Subcontractor
and
Downstream
Subcontractor
Certification
Report
5.2.13 At least annually, if
applicable.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.3 SCOPE OF SERVICES
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0070 Report of Drug
Use Review
(DUR) Program
Activities
5.3.7.H Annually. DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.4 COMMUNITY BASED ADULT SERVICES
[[page 479]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 479 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0072 CBAS Member
Enrollment
Report
5.4.3.A On a quarterly
basis.
DHCS
D.0113 Summary of
CBAS
Complaints
5.4.3.C 30 calendar days
following the end of
the reporting period.
DHCS
D.0073 CBAS
Grievance and
Appeal Reports
5.4.3.D 30 calendar days
following the end of
the reporting period.
DHCS
D.0120 CBAS Provider
List
5.4.3.E Annually. DHCS
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.5 MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE
DISORDER BENEFITS
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Section.
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 5.6 MOUs WITH LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AGENCIES, COUNTY PROGRAMS, AND THIRD PARTIES
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0130 Revised MOU
Template
5.6.1.C
.2
As needed. After
execution
DHCS
D.0128 MOU Public
Posting
5.6.2.D Upon completed
execution of
contract.
Executed
MOUs must
be publicly
posted
Public and
DHCS
D.0075 Status Report 5.6.3
Quarterly, beginning
four months after
the effective date of
this Contract or
within the timeframe
required under this
Contract and
relevant APL, until
all required MOUs
are executed.
DHCS
D.0127 MOU Liaison
Change
Notification
5.6.3.A
.3
Within five Working
Days of any change
in the designated
MOUs’ liaison.
DHCS
[[page 480]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 480 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0121 Existing MOU 5.3.6.A
.6
Within ten Working
Days of receipt of
the request.
DHCS
D.0076 Copy of
Executed
MOUs
5.6.3 Upon execution,
modification or
renewal.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS
D.0077 MOU Review
Report
5.6.3.B Annually. DHCS,
upon
request
EXHIBIT A, ATTACHMENT III – 6.1 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND
RESPONSE
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0078 Emergency
Preparedness
and Response
Plan
6.1 Prior to the start of
Operations.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS
D.0079 Emergency
Contact
Information
Update
6.1.2.A No less than every
six months; and
As changes occur.
DHCS
D.0080 Cooperative
Agreements
6.1.2.D At least annually.
DHCS
D.0081 Emergency
Drill Report
6.1.2.E Within 30 calendar
days after the drill is
completed.
DHCS
D.0082 Member
Emergency
Preparedness
Plan
Templates
6.1.3 Prior to use for each
mode of
communication.
DHCS
D.0083 Daily
Emergency
Reporting
6.1.5.B Once a day, at a
minimum,
throughout the
State of
Emergency.
DHCS
EXHIBIT B, BUDGET DETAIL AND PAYMENT PROVISIONS
[[page 481]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 481 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0084 Supplemental
Payments
Report
1.1.7.
A
On a monthly basis
no later than 20
calendar days
following the end of
each month.
DHCS
D.0085 Supplement
Payment
Eligibility Data
1.1.7.
A
Contractor must
properly submit all
required data to
DHCS within 12
months of the month
of the service
entitling Contractor
to a Supplemental
Payment.
DHCS
D.0086 Additional
Payments
Report
1.1.8.
A
On a monthly basis,
no later than 20
calendar days
following the end of
each month.
DHCS
D.0087 Additional
Payments
Report
Eligibility Data
1.1.8.
A
Contractor must
properly submit all
required data to
DHCS within 12
months of the month
of the service
entitling Contractor
to an additional
payment.
DHCS
D.0122
Financial
Performance
Guarantee
1.1.12 Annually. DHCS
D.0088 Medical Loss
Ratio
Remittance
1.1.15 When the ratio for
the MLR reporting
year does not meet
the minimum MLR
standard.
DHCS
EXHIBIT C, GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT D(f), SPECIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS
[[page 482]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 482 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0094 Request for
Subcontract
Authorization
5.a Before Contractor
enters into or is
reimbursed for any
subcontract for
services costing
$5,000 or more.
DHCS
D.0096 Requests for
Disclosure of
Confidential
Information
14 As applicable. DHCS
D.0097 Contractor
Certification of
Federal Fund
Expenditure
17.c As applicable. DHCS
D.0098 Financial and
Compliance
Audit Reports
17.d Within 30 calendar
days after the
completion of the
audit.
DHCS
D.0099 Contractor
Explanation for
Debarment and
Suspension
Certification.
20 As applicable. DHCS
EXHIBIT E, PROGRAM TERMS AND CONDITIONS
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0123
Certifications -
Data,
Information,
and
Documentation
Submitted to
DHCS
1.1.11 Monthly. DHCS
D.0100 Contractor’s
Analysis
regarding its
financial
solvency
1.1.16 As needed. DHCS
[[page 483]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 483 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0101 Contractor
Termination
Notice due to
financial
insolvency
1.1.16 As needed, and at
least six months
prior to expected
effective termination
date.
DHCS
D.0124 Phaseout
Transition
Requirements
1.1.17.
B
Within no later than
90 calendar days
prior to termination
or expiration of this
Contract and
through the
Phaseout Period for
each Service Area.
DHCS
D.0102 Notice of
Dispute
1.1.21.
B
Within 30 calendar
days from the date
that the alleged
dispute arises or
otherwise becomes
known to
Contractor.
DHCS
D.0103 Costs
Avoidance
Reports
1.1.25 Within ten calendar
days of discovery
By the 15th day of
each month.
DHCS
D.0104 Post-Payment
Recovery
Report
1.1.25.
H
1.1.25.
J
At the tenth day of
each month; and
Within ten calendar
days of discovery
when Contractor
identifies OHC
unknown to DHCS.
DHCS
D.0105 Service and
Utilization
Information
1.1.26 Within 30 calendar
days of the DHCS’
request.
DHCS
D.0125 Litigation
Support
Records
1.1.27.
A
Upon DHCS
request.
DHCS
[[page 484]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 484 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0107 DVBE
Reporting
Requirements
1.1.31 60 calendar days
after receiving final
payment, if
Contractor made a
commitment to
achieve DVBE
participation.
DHCS
EXHIBIT F, CONTRACTOR’S RELEASE
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0108 Contractor’s
Release
F With the submission
of final invoice(s).
DHCS
EXHIBIT G, BUSINESS ASSOCIATE ADDENDUM
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0109 Notice to DHCS
of Breaches
and Security
Incidents
18.1.1 See contract
language for details.
DHCS
D.0110 Completed
Final Privacy
Incident
Reporting Form
18.3 Within ten Working
Days of the
discovery of the
security incident or
breach.
DHCS
EXHIBIT H, CONFLICT OF INTEREST AVOIDANCE REQUIREMENTS
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT I, CONTRACTOR’S PARENT GUARANTY REQUIREMENTS
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT J, DELEGATION REPORTING AND COMPLIANCE PLAN
[[page 485]]
Exhibit A, Attachment III
Page 485 of 642
ID Deliverable
Title
Ref. Frequency Publicly
Available
Recipient
D.0111 Delegation
Reporting and
Compliance
Plan
3.1.3;
Exh. J
Annually and at any
time there is a
change as specified
by DHCS within 30
calendar days
following the annual
reporting period or
the material change.
On
Contractor’s
website.
DHCS;
Public
EXHIBIT K, EXCLUDED PROVISIONS AS TO CONTRACTORS NOT LICENSED
PURSUANT TO THE KNOX-KEENE HEALTH CARE SERVICE PLAN ACT OF 1975
No deliverables or requirements listed for this Exhibit.
EXHIBIT L, REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC TO CONTRACTOR
Any deliverables for Contractor-specific requirements will be stated in Exhibit L.
[[page 486]]
Exhibit B
Page 486 of 642
Exhibit B – Budget Detail and Payment Provisions
1.0 Budget Detail and Payment Provisions
[[page 487]]
Exhibit B
Page 487 of 642
1.1 Budget Detail and Payment Provisions
1.1.1 Budget Contingency Clause
1.1.2 Contractor Risk
1.1.3 Capitation Payment Rates
1.1.4 Capitation Payment Rates Constitute Payment in Full
1.1.5 Determination and Redetermination of Capitation Payment Rates
1.1.6 Redetermination of Capitation Payment Rates Due to Obligation Changes
1.1.7 Supplemental Payments
1.1.8 Additional Payments
1.1.9 Recovery of Amounts Paid to Contractor
1.1.10 Reinsurance
1.1.11 Catastrophic Coverage Limitation
1.1.12 Financial Performance Guarantee
1.1.13 Medicare Coordination
1.1.14 Special Contract Provisions Related to Payment
1.1.15 Medical Loss Ratio Remittance
1.1.16 State Program Receiving Federal Financial Participation
1.1.17 Community Reinvestment
1.1.18 Quality Achievement Requirement
1.1.19 Enhanced Care Management Risk Corridor
1.1.20 Federally Qualified Health Center Alternative Payment Model Risk
Corridor
1.1.21 Unsatisfactory Immigration Status Risk Corridor
[[page 488]]
Exhibit B
Page 488 of 642
1.1 Budget Detail and Payment Provisions
1.1.1 Budget Contingency Clause
Any requirement of payment or performance by DHCS and Contractor for the
period of the Contract will be dependent upon the availability of future
appropriations by the Legislature for the purpose of the Medi-Cal program.
A. It is mutually agreed that if the Budget Act of the current year or any
subsequent years covered under this Contract does not appropriate
sufficient funds for the program, DHCS has no liability to pay any funds
whatsoever to Contractor or to furnish any other considerations under this
Contract, and Contractor is not obligated to perform any provisions of this
Contract in any year when insufficient funding may occur. Further, should
funding for any Fiscal Year be reduced or deleted by the Budget Act for
purposes of this program, DHCS must have the option to:
1) Cancel this Contract with no liability accruing to DHCS and no
further obligation by Contractor to perform hereunder; or
2) Offer a Contract amendment to Contractor to reflect the reduced
amount of available funding.
B. All payments are subject to the availability of federal appropriation of
Medicaid funding.
1.1.2 Contractor Risk
Except as otherwise specified in this Contract, Contractor will assume the total
risk of providing Covered Services to Members on the basis of periodic
Capitation Payments paid to Contractor by DHCS for each Member. Subject to
Exhibit B, Section 1.1.15 (Medical Loss Ratio Remittance), any funds not
expended by Contractor after having fulfilled all obligations under this Contract
may be retained by Contractor.
1.1.3 Capitation Payment Rates
A. DHCS must remit to Contractor a Capitation Payment no later than 45
calendar days after the first day of each month for each Member that
appears on the approved list of Members supplied to Contractor by DHCS.
Capitation Payments must be made in accordance with the schedule of
Capitation Payment rates set forth below. For the list of aid codes included
in each Rate Group below, please see the definition of Potential Member
set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment I, Section 1.0 (Definitions) of this
Contract. Supplemental and Additional Payments listed below will be
[[page 489]]
Exhibit B
Page 489 of 642
made in accordance to the requirements stated in Subsections 1.1.7
(Supplemental Payments) and 1.1.8 (Additional Payments) of this Exhibit.
For the period January 1, 2024 – December 31, 2024 County
Rate Groups Rates
SIS Adult & Family/Optional Targeted Low-Income Child
(Under 21)
UIS Adult & Family/Optional Targeted Low-Income Child
(Under 21)
SIS Adult & Family/Optional Targeted Low-Income Adult
21 & Older)
UIS Adult & Family/Optional Targeted Low-Income Adult
(21 & Older)
SIS SPD
UIS SPD
SIS SPD/Dual
UIS SPD/Dual
SIS Long-Term Care/Non-Full Dual
UIS Long-Term Care/Non-Full Dual
SIS Long-Term Care/Dual
UIS Long-Term Care Dual
SIS Adult Expansion
UIS Adult Expansion
[SIS Whole Child Model-Selected COHS Only]
[UIS Whole Child Model-Selected COHS Only]
For the period January 1, 2024 – December 31, 2024 County
Supplemental and Additional Payment Groups Rates
SIS Maternity
UIS Maternity
B. If DHCS creates a new aid code that is split or derived from an existing aid
code covered under this Contract, and the aid code has a neutral Contract
Revenue effect for Contractor, then the split aid code will automatically be
included in the same Rate Group as the original aid code covered under
this Contract. Contractor agrees to accept the Capitation Payment rate
specified for the original aid code as payment in full for Members in the
new aid code. DHCS must confirm all aid code splits and the rates of
payment for such new aid codes in writing to Contractor as soon as
practicable after such aid code splits occur.
C. In accordance with 42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), part 438,
section 438.7, the actuarial basis for the computation of Capitation
Payment rates must be set forth in DHCS’ rate certification(s) for the
applicable Rating Period. Subject to approval by Centers for Medicare &
[[page 490]]
Exhibit B
Page 490 of 642
Medicaid Services (CMS), said rate certification(s) are hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this Contract by this
reference as if attached hereto in full.
1.1.4 Capitation Payment Rates Constitute Payment in Full
Except as otherwise specified in this Contract, Capitation Payment rates for each
Rating Period, as calculated by DHCS and approved by CMS, are prospective
rates and constitute payment in full on behalf of a Member for all Covered
Services required by such Member and for all Administrative Costs incurred by
Contractor in providing or arranging for such services under the terms of this
Contract. Except as otherwise specified in this Contract, DHCS is not responsible
for making payments associated with Contractor’s losses.
1.1.5 Determination and Redetermination of Capitation Payment Rates
A. In accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I) section 14301.1,
DHCS must establish Capitation Payment rates on an actuarial basis for
each Rating Period, and reserves the right to redetermine and to amend
such rates as necessary and appropriate.
1) DHCS must establish Capitation Payment rates in accordance with
W&I section 14301.1, applicable federal and State laws and
regulations, and generally accepted actuarial principles and
practices.
2) DHCS reserves the right, subject to actuarial judgment and
generally accepted actuarial principles and practices, to consider
Contractor’s performance on specified quality and equity
benchmarks, as determined by DHCS and communicated to
Contractors in advance of each applicable Rating Period, within the
determination of Capitation Payment rates for that Rating Period.
3) If Contractor delegates financial risk for the provision of Covered
Services in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
3.1.6 (Financial Viability of Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers), DHCS reserves the right,
subject to actuarial judgment and generally accepted actuarial
principles and practices, to consider the actual payments received
by Providers for providing Covered Services to Members to inform
the determination of Capitation Payment rates.
B. Capitation Payment rates must be effectuated through an amendment or
change order to this Contract in accordance with Exhibit E, Subsection
1.1.6 (Amendment and Change Order Process) of this Contract, subject to
the following provisions:
[[page 491]]
Exhibit B
Page 491 of 642
1) The amendment or change order is effective as of January 1 of
each year covered by this Contract;
2) In the event there is any delay in a determination or redetermination
of Capitation Payment rates so that an amendment or change order
may not be processed in sufficient time to permit payment of new
rates commencing January 1, payment to Contractor must continue
at the rates stated in an R Letter sent to Contractor by DHCS. The
R Letter serves as notification from DHCS to Contractor of the
Capitation Payment rates and the time period for which these rates
will be applied. The R Letter must not be considered exempt from
any requirement of this Contract. Those continued payments
constitute interim payment only. Upon CMS final approval of the
amendment/change order and rate certification providing for the
rate change, DHCS must make retroactive adjustments for those
months for which interim payment was made;
3) By accepting payment of new Capitation Payment rates prior to
approval by CMS of the amendment/change order to this Contract
implementing such new rates, Contractor stipulates to a confession
of judgment for any and all amounts received in excess of the final
approved rate. In the event that the final approved rate differs from
the rates established by DHCS or agreed upon by Contractor and
DHCS:
a) Any underpayment by DHCS must be paid to Contractor
after final approval of the new rates. DHCS will provide
Contractor a timeframe for payment of any underpayments;
b) Unless otherwise required by CMS, any overpayment to
Contractor must be offset by DHCS’ withholding from
Contractor's future Contract Revenues of any amount due.
DHCS may, at its sole discretion, withhold up to 100 percent
of Contract Revenues for each month until any overpayment
is fully recovered by the State; and
c) Contractor must review all Contract Revenues and notify
DHCS of any payment errors in a form and manner specified
by DHCS. If the error favors DHCS, DHCS may offset
against future Contract Revenues as stated in paragraph (b)
above. If the error favors Contractor, Contractor must notify
DHCS within 365 calendar days of payment, otherwise
Contractor forfeits the right to receive the corrected payment,
except when Contractor demonstrates to DHCS’ satisfaction,
[[page 492]]
Exhibit B
Page 492 of 642
in a form and manner specified by DHCS, that Contractor
could not reasonably have identified the error.
4) If mutual agreement between DHCS and Contractor cannot be
attained on Capitation Payment rates in accordance with this
Paragraph B, Contractor has the right to terminate this Contract.
Contractor’s notification of the intent to terminate this Contract must
be in writing and provided to DHCS at least nine months prior to the
effective date of termination, subject to any earlier termination date
negotiated in accordance with the terms set forth in Exhibit E,
Subsection 1.1.16 (Termination) of this Contract. DHCS must pay
Capitation Payment rates determined for the applicable Rating
Periods until the Contract is terminated; and
5) DHCS must make reasonable efforts to notify and consult with
Contractor regarding any proposed redetermination of Capitation
Payment rates in accordance with this provision or Exhibit B,
Subsection 1.1.6 (Redetermination of Capitation Payment Rates
Due to Obligation Changes) below prior to implementation of any
new rates.
1.1.6 Redetermination of Capitation Payment Rates Due to Obligation Changes
Final Capitation Payment rates may be adjusted during or subsequent to the
applicable Rating Period to provide for changes in obligations that result in a
material projected increase or decrease of cost as determined by the certifying
actuaries, in accordance with W&I section 14301.1, to Contractor. Any
adjustments must be effectuated through an amendment or change order to the
Contract subject to the following:
A. The amendment or change order is effective as of the first day of the
month in which the change in obligations is effective, as determined by
DHCS;
B. In accordance with Subsection 1.1.5 (Determination and Redetermination
of Capitation Payment Rates) of this Exhibit B, in the event DHCS is
unable to process the amendment or change order in sufficient time to
permit payment of the adjusted rates as of the month in which the change
in obligations is effective, payment to Contractor must continue at the
rates then in effect. Upon final approval of the amendment or change
order, DHCS must make adjustments for those months in which interim
payments were made; and
C. DHCS and Contractor may negotiate an earlier termination date, pursuant
to Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.16 (Termination) of this Contract, in the event
a change in contractual obligations is created by a State or federal change
[[page 493]]
Exhibit B
Page 493 of 642
in the Medi-Cal program, or by a lawsuit that substantially alters the
financial assumptions and conditions under which Contractor entered into
this Contract, such that Contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
DHCS that it cannot remain financially solvent through the termination
date provided by this Contract.
1.1.7 Supplemental Payments
A. Contractor is entitled to Supplemental Payments stated within this Section
in accordance with the schedule of Supplemental Payment rates set forth
in this Exhibit B, Subsection 1.1.3 (Capitation Payment Rates). Contractor
must maintain evidence of payment for qualified services entitling
Contractor to Supplemental Payments. Upon audit, Contractor’s failure to
have supporting records may result in recoupment by DHCS of
Supplemental Payments paid to Contractor.
1) On a monthly basis, by no later than 20 calendar days following the
end of each month, and in a format specified by DHCS, Contractor
must submit a report for Supplemental Payments. This report must
identify the Members receiving services qualifying for a
Supplemental Payment and for whom Contractor is claiming
payment.
2) To be eligible to receive a Supplemental Payment, Contractor must
properly submit all required data to DHCS within 12 months of the
month of the service entitling Contractor to a Supplemental
Payment.
B. Maternity Supplemental Payments
1) Contractor is entitled to receive maternity Supplemental Payments
for Members enrolled with Contractor on the date of the delivery of
a Child, including retroactive Enrollments.
2) The maternity Supplemental Payment reimburses Contractor for
the projected cost of delivery as determined by DHCS.
1.1.8 Additional Payments
A. Contractor is entitled to additional payments stated within this Section in
accordance with the schedule of additional payment rates set forth below.
Contractor must maintain evidence of payment for qualified services
entitling Contractor to additional payments. Upon audit, Contractor’s
failure to have supporting records may result in recoupment by DHCS of
additional payments paid to Contractor.
[[page 494]]
Exhibit B
Page 494 of 642
1) On a monthly basis, by no later than 20 calendar days following the
end of each month and in a format specified by DHCS, Contractor
must submit a report for additional payments. This report must
identify the Members receiving services qualifying for any additional
payment and for whom Contractor is claiming payment.
2) To be eligible to receive an additional payment, Contractor must
properly submit all required data to DHCS within 12 months of the
month of the service entitling Contractor to an additional payment.
B. Contractor is entitled to receive an IHCP payment for Members qualified to
receive services in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
3.3.7.C (Indian Health Care Providers) of this Contract.
1) DHCS will annually publish the IHCP payment rates via an All Plan
Letter (APL).
2) The IHCP payment reimburses Contractor for the amount paid to
the IHCPs as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.7
(Federally Qualified Health Center, Rural Health Center, and Indian
Health Care Provider) of this Contract. Payments must be based on
Member utilization of qualifying services at IHCPs as reported by
Contractor.
1.1.9 Recovery of Amounts Paid to Contractor
DHCS has the right to recover from Contractor amounts paid to Contractor in the
following circumstances:
A. If DHCS determines that a Member has been improperly enrolled due to
ineligibility of the Member to enroll in Contractor’s Medi-Cal managed care
health plan, a Member’s residence is outside of Contractor's Service Area,
or, pursuant to 22 California Code of Regulations (CCR) section
53891(a)(2), or a Member should have been disenrolled with an effective
date in a prior month, DHCS may recover amounts paid to Contractor
associated with the Member for the month(s) in question. To the extent
permitted by law, Contractor may seek to recover any payments made to
Providers for Covered Services rendered for the month(s) in question.
Contractor must inform Providers that claims for services provided to
Members during the month(s) in question may be paid by the DHCS fiscal
intermediary if the Member is determined eligible for the Medi-Cal
program;
B. Upon request by Contractor, DHCS may allow Contractor to retain
amounts paid to Contractor associated with a Member who is eligible to
enroll in Contractor’s Medi-Cal managed care health plan, but should have
[[page 495]]
Exhibit B
Page 495 of 642
been retroactively disenrolled in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 4.2.2 (Disenrollment) of this Contract or under other
circumstances as approved by DHCS. If Contractor retains Capitation
Payments, Supplemental Payments, and any other additional payments,
Contractor must provide or arrange and pay for all Medically Necessary
Covered Services for the Member until such Member is disenrolled on a
non-retroactive basis pursuant to the terms set forth in Exhibit A,
Attachment III, Subsection 4.2.2 (Disenrollment) of this Contract;
C. As a result of Contractor's failure to perform contractual responsibilities to
comply with mandatory federal Medicaid requirements, the United States
Department of Health and Human Services (U.S. DHHS) may disallow
Federal Financial Participation (FFP) for payments made by DHCS to
Contractor. In this event, DHCS may recover the amounts disallowed by
U.S. DHHS by imposing an offset to Contract Revenues. If recovery of the
full amount at one time imposes a financial hardship on Contractor,
Contractor may request to repay the recoverable amounts in monthly
installments over a period of consecutive months not to exceed six
months. DHCS, at its sole discretion, may grant or deny such a request;
and
D. If DHCS determines that any other erroneous or improper payment(s) not
mentioned above has been made to Contractor, DHCS may recover all
such determined amounts by the imposition of an offset to Contract
Revenues. At least 30 calendar days prior to seeking any such recovery,
DHCS must notify Contractor of the improper or erroneous nature of the
payment, and must describe the recovery process. If recovery of the full
amount at one time imposes a financial hardship on Contractor,
Contractor may request to repay the recoverable amounts in monthly
installments over a period of consecutive months not to exceed six
months. DHCS, at its sole discretion, may grant or deny such a request.
1.1.10 Reinsurance
In accordance with 22 CCR section 53252, Contractor may obtain reinsurance
(i.e., stop loss coverage) to ensure maintenance of adequate capital by
Contractor for the cost of providing Covered Services under this Contract, subject
to the following conditions:
A. Reinsurance must not reduce Contractor’s liability below $5,000 per
Member for any one 12-month period.
B. Reinsurance may cover both of the following:
1) The total cost of services provided to Members under emergency
circumstances by non-contracted Providers, including the cost of
[[page 496]]
Exhibit B
Page 496 of 642
inpatient care in a non-contracted facility until such time as the
Member may be safely transported to a Network facility; and
2) Up to 90 percent of all expenditures related to this Contract
exceeding 115 percent of Contract Revenues and third-party
recoveries during any Fiscal Year of Contractor.
C. At its sole discretion and determination, and following consultation with
Contractor, DHCS may require Contractor to retain appropriate
reinsurance coverage for high-cost Members or services.
1.1.11 Catastrophic Coverage Limitation
DHCS may limit Contractor's liability to provide or arrange and pay for health
care services for illness of, or injury to Members, resulting from or greatly
aggravated by a catastrophic occurrence or disaster which occurs subsequent to
Enrollment. Following the Director's invocation of this catastrophic coverage
limitation, Contractor will return a prorated amount of the total Capitation
Payment received by Contractor for the month. The amount returned will be
determined by dividing the total Capitation Payment made to Contractor for such
month by the number of days in that month, whereupon Contractor will return the
amount to DHCS for each day in of the month after the Director’s invocation of
this catastrophic coverage limitation.
1.1.12 Financial Performance Guarantee
A. In accordance with 22 CCR section 53865, Contractor must annually
provide satisfactory evidence of, and maintain, a Financial Performance
Guarantee in the form specified by DHCS and in an amount of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000) or equal to at least one month’s Contract
Revenues for each of Contractor’s Service Areas, based on Contractor’s
average monthly Contract Revenues calculated for the previous twelve
months of Contractor’s operation, except that if Contractor has been
operating for less that 12 months average monthly Contract Revenues will
be calculated for as many months as Contractor has been operating,
whichever is higher, and subject to approval by DHCS. In its discretion,
DHCS may increase the required amount of the Financial Performance
Guarantee for Contractor up to an amount of two million dollars
($2,000,000) or equal to two months’ Contract Revenues for each of
Contractor’s Service Areas, based on Contractor’s average monthly
Contract Revenues for the previous twelve months, except that if
Contractor has been operating for less that 12 months average monthly
Contract Revenues will be calculated for as many months as Contractor
has been operating, whichever is higher, for any material breach of this
Contract.
[[page 497]]
Exhibit B
Page 497 of 642
B. At Contractor's request, and with DHCS approval, Contractor may
establish a phase-in schedule to accumulate the required Financial
Performance Guarantee. Contractor may elect to satisfy the Financial
Performance Guarantee requirement by receiving payment on a post
payment basis, subject to DHCS approval.
C. DHCS must take possession of the Financial Performance Guarantee in
an amount sufficient to indemnify DHCS in the event that Contractor
materially breaches or defaults on one or more terms in this Contract.
Unless DHCS has a financial claim or offset against Contractor in which
case DHCS may immediately enforce its rights under the Financial
Performance Guarantee, the Financial Performance Guarantee must
remain in effect through the completion of the Phaseout Period in
accordance with Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.17 (Phaseout Requirements).
1.1.13 Medicare Coordination
In accordance with 42 CFR section 438.3(t), Contractor must enter into a
Coordination of Benefits Agreement with the Medicare program through CMS,
and must agree to participate in Medicare’s automated claims crossover process
for full benefit dual eligible Members.
1.1.14 Special Contract Provisions Related to Payment
A. Contractor must reimburse Network Providers pursuant to the terms of
each of the following applicable Pass-Through Payments established
pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.6(d), in accordance with the CMS-
approved rate certification, and in a form and manner specified by DHCS
through APLs or other technical guidance:
1) Private Hospital and District and Municipal Public Hospital (DMPH)
Pass-Through Payments, which requires Contractor to make
increased payments to private hospitals and DMPHs in accordance
with DHCS guidance.
2) Martin Luther King Jr. (MLK) Community Hospital Pass-Through
Payment, which requires Contractor to make increased payments
[[page 498]]
Exhibit B
Page 498 of 642
to MLK Community Hospital in Los Angeles County in accordance
with W&I section 14165.50 and DHCS guidance.
3) Benioff Children’s Hospital Oakland (BCHO) Pass-Through
Payment, which requires Contractor to make increased payments
to BCHO in Alameda County in accordance with DHCS guidance.
4) Distinct Part Nursing Facilities Pass-Through Payment, which
requires Contractor to make increased payments to select publicly
owned hospitals in accordance with DHCS guidance.
B. Contractor must reimburse Providers pursuant to the terms of each
applicable Directed Payment Initiative in a form and manner specified by
DHCS through APLs or other technical guidance. For applicable Rating
Periods, DHCS will make the terms of each Directed Payment Initiative,
including the Directed Payment Initiative preprint as applicable, available
on the DHCS website at https://www.dhcs.ca.gov. Directed Payment
Initiatives are subject to change and currently include:
1) Designated Public Hospital (DPH) Enhanced Payment Program
(EPP), which requires Contractor to make uniform dollar or
percentage increase payments to DPH systems for every qualifying
service or assigned Member months in accordance with DHCS
guidance, including but not limited to APL 21-018, the Directed
Payment Initiative preprint, and W&I section 14197.4(b).
2) Private Hospital Directed Payments Program (PHDP), which
requires Contractor to make uniform dollar increase payments to
eligible private hospitals for every qualifying service in accordance
with DHCS guidance, including but not limited to APL 21-018 and
the Directed Payment Initiative preprint.
3) District Hospital Directed Payments Program (DHDP), which
requires Contractor to make uniform dollar increase payments to
eligible DMPHs for every qualifying service in accordance with
DHCS guidance, including but not limited to APL 21-018 and the
Directed Payment Initiative preprint.
4) DPH Quality Incentive Pool (QIP), which requires Contractor to
make performance-based quality incentive payments to DPH
systems based on DHCS' evaluation of DPH systems’ performance
on specified quality measures in accordance with DHCS guidance,
including but not limited to APL 21-018, the Directed Payment
Initiative preprint, and W&I section 14197.4(c).
5) DMPH QIP, which requires Contractor to make performance-based
quality incentive payments to DMPH systems based on DHCS'
[[page 499]]
Exhibit B
Page 499 of 642
evaluation of DMPH systems’ performance on specified quality
measures in accordance with DHCS guidance, including but not
limited to APL 21-018, the Directed Payment Initiative preprint, and
W&I section 14197.4(c).
6)
Directed Payments for Developmental Screening Services, which
requires Contractor to make uniform dollar increase payments to
eligible Network Providers for every adjudicated claim for specified
developmental screening services in accordance with DHCS
guidance, including but not limited to APL 23-016, the Directed
Payment Initiative preprint, and W&I section 14105.197(a)(3).
7) Directed Payments for Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs),
which requires Contractor to pay eligible Network Providers at no
less than the California Medicaid State Plan approved rates for
every adjudicated claim for specified ACEs screening services in
accordance with DHCS guidance, including but not limited to APL
23-017, and W&I section 14105.197(a)(4).
8) Proposition 56 Directed Payments for Family Planning Services,
which requires Contractor to make uniform dollar increase
payments to eligible Providers for every adjudicated claim for
specified family planning services in accordance with DHCS
guidance, including but not limited to APL 23-008 and the Directed
Payment Initiative preprint.
9) Organ and Bone Marrow Transplants, which requires Contractor to
pay eligible contracted and non-contracted Providers amounts
equivalent to the California Medicaid State Plan approved rates, or
amounts equivalent to the rates published by DHCS for University
of California system facilities furnishing subject services, for
specified organ and bone marrow transplant services using the
methodology developed and published by DHCS on an annual
basis in accordance with DHCS guidance, including but not limited
to APL 21-015, the Directed Payment Initiative preprint, and W&I
section 14184.201(d).
10) LTC FFS-Equivalent Base Directed Payment, which requires
Contractors to pay Network Providers, in specified counties where
services were traditionally covered in the FFS delivery system, at
exactly the California Medicaid State Plan approved case or service
rates for Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF) services and Intermediate
Care Facility for the Developmentally Disabled (ICF/DD), ICF/DD-
Habilitative (ICF/DD-H), and ICF/DD-Nursing (ICF/DD-N) services
and Subacute (adult and pediatric) services . In all other counties, it
requires Contractor to pay Network Providers at no less than the
California Medicaid State Plan approved rates for SNF services and
[[page 500]]
Exhibit B
Page 500 of 642
ICF/DD, ICF/DD-H, and ICF/DD-N services and Subacute (adult
and pediatric) services at minimum. All payments must be made in
accordance with DHCS guidance, including but not limited to APL
23-004, the Directed Payment Initiative preprint, and W&I section
14184.201(b) – (c).
11) Workforce Quality Incentive Program (WQIP), which requires
Contractor to make uniform dollar increase payments to eligible
Network Providers for every qualifying service adjusted based on
DHCS' evaluation of their performance on specified quality and
workforce measures in accordance with DHCS through APLs or
other guidance, the Directed Payment Initiative preprint, and W&I
section 14126.024.
12) In accordance with W&I section 5961.4(c), and for applicable dates
of service, Contractor must reimburse Providers of Medically
Necessary outpatient mental health or SUD treatment provided at a
School Site to a Member who is a student 25 years of age or
younger at least at the fee schedule rate or rates developed by the
Department in accordance with W&I section 5961.4(a), as defined
by DHCS in the California Medicaid State Plan, a Directed Payment
Initiative, and other applicable guidance, but only to the extent
Contractor is financially responsible for those School Site services
under this Contract.
13) Equity and Practice Transformation Provider Directed Payment
Program, which requires Contractor to pay performance-based
quality incentive payments to Primary Care practices that provide
pediatric, family medicine, internal medicine, or obstetrics and
gynecology (OB/GYN) services Members based on DHCS'
evaluation of Provider performance on specified quality measures
in accordance with the Directed Payment Initiative preprint and in a
form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other
guidance.
14) Targeted Rate Increases require Contractor to pay eligible Network
Providers at no less than the California Medicaid State Plan
approved rates for specified primary care services, including those
provided by physician and non-physician professionals, obstetric
services, including Doula services, and non-specialty mental health
services, in accordance with W&I Section 14105.201, and in a form
and manner specified by DHCS through APLs 24-007 or other
guidance.
15) Children’s Hospital Supplemental Payment (CHSP), which requires
Contractor to make uniform dollar increase payments to Children’s
Hospitals, as defined in W&I section 10727, for each qualifying
[[page 501]]
Exhibit B
Page 501 of 642
service in accordance with DHCS guidance, including but not
limited to APL 21-018 and the Directed Payment Initiative preprint.
16) Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) Alternative Payment
Methodology (APM), which requires Contractor to make capitated
payments to participating FQHCs for each Member assigned to that
FQHC, in accordance with W&I, Article 4.1 (commencing with
Section 14138.1) of Chapter 7 of Part 3 of Division 9, and
Attachment 4.19-B, pages 6AA7-6AA17, of the California Medicaid
State Plan, and direction provided by DHCS through APLs or other
guidance.
C. Contractor must comply with the terms of any Risk Sharing Mechanisms
instituted in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.6(b)(1), in a form and
manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other technical guidance.
D. Contractor must comply with the terms of any applicable Incentive
Arrangements approved by CMS under 42 CFR section 438.6(b)(2), in a
form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other technical
guidance. For applicable Rating Periods, DHCS will make the terms of
each approved Incentive Arrangement available on the DHCS website.
Incentive Arrangement payments must not exceed 105 percent of the
approved Capitation Payments attributable to the Enrollees or services
covered by the Incentive Arrangement, as specified in 42 CFR section
438.6(b)(2) and as calculated by DHCS. DHCS may impose a cap on
incentive payments and/or participation in applicable Incentive
Arrangements if DHCS determines that the incentive payment(s) are likely
to exceed 105 percent of the approved Capitation Payments. Contractor
will be required to remit to DHCS any incentive payment amounts in
excess of 105 percent of approved Capitation Payments. Incentive
Arrangements are subject to change in accordance with the requirements
of 42 CFR section 438.6(b)(2). Current Incentive Arrangements include:
1) California Advancing and Innovating Medi-Cal (CalAIM) Incentive
Payment Program, through which Contractor may earn incentive
payments for achievement of specified CalAIM Incentive Payment
Program milestones and metrics associated with implementation of
CalAIM initiatives as determined by DHCS and in accordance with
DHCS guidance, including but not limited to the CalAIM Incentive
Payment Program terms specified on the DHCS website, APL 23-
003, and W&I section 14184.207.
2) Student Behavioral Health Incentive Program (SBHIP), through
which Contractor may earn incentive payments for achievement of
specified milestones and metrics associated with targeted
interventions that increase access to preventive, early intervention,
[[page 502]]
Exhibit B
Page 502 of 642
and Behavioral Health Services by school-affiliated Behavioral
Health Providers as determined by DHCS and in accordance with
the terms on the DHCS website, W&I section 5961.3, and APL 23-
035.
3) The Quality Withhold and Incentive Program, which consists of a
Withhold Arrangement as described in Paragraph E below, and an
Incentive Arrangement through which Contractor may earn
incentive payments for achievement of certain targets associated
with quality scoring from Healthcare Effectiveness Data and
Information Set (HEDIS®) and Consumer Assessment of
Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS®) related data, as
determined by DHCS and in accordance with the terms on the
DHCS website, W&I section 14301.1(e) and (o)(4), and in a form
and manner specified through APLs or other guidance.
E. Contractor must comply with the terms of any applicable Withhold
Arrangement approved by CMS under 42 CFR section 438.6(b)(3), in a
form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other guidance. For
applicable Rating Periods, DHCS will make the terms of each approved
Withhold Arrangement available on the DHCS website.
1) The Withhold Arrangement must ensure that the Capitation
Payment, minus any portion of the withhold that is not reasonably
achievable, is actuarially sound as determined by an actuary. The
total amount of the withhold, achievable or not, will take into
consideration the financial operating needs accounting for the size
and characteristics of the populations covered under this Contract,
as well as Contractor’s capital reserves as measured by the risk-
based capital level, months of claims reserve, or other appropriate
measure of reserves.
2) Current Withhold Arrangements include the Quality Withhold and
Incentive Program, which consists of an Incentive Arrangement as
described in this Paragraph E, and a Withhold Arrangement
through which Contractor may earn back the entire Capitation
Payment withheld, or portion thereof, for achievement of certain
targets associated with quality scoring from HEDIS® and CAHPS®
related data, as determined by DHCS and in accordance with
DHCS guidance, including but not limited to the terms on the DHCS
website, W&I section 14301.1(e) and (o)(4), and in a form and
manner specified in APLs or other guidance.
1.1.15 Medical Loss Ratio Remittance
[[page 503]]
Exhibit B
Page 503 of 642
In accordance with W&I section 14197.2(c)(1), Contractor must provide a
remittance to DHCS for a Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) reporting year if the MLR
reported in accordance with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5 (Medical
Loss Ratio) for that MLR reporting year does not meet the minimum MLR
standard of 85 percent. DHCS must validate Contractor’s reported remittance
amount pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.5 (Medical Loss
Ratio) and determine the final remittance amount owed by Contractor for each
MLR reporting year and rating region. Starting January 1, 2025, Contractor must
impose equivalent remittance requirements on its Fully Delegated
Subcontractors, Partially Delegated Subcontractors, Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractors, and Downstream Partially Delegated Subcontractors.
1.1.16 State Program Receiving Federal Financial Participation
Should any part of the scope of work under this contract relate to a State
program receiving Federal Financial Participation (FFP) that is no longer
authorized by law (e.g., which has been vacated by a court of law, or for which
CMS has withdrawn federal authority, or which is the subject of a legislative
repeal), Contractor must cease its work on the part no longer authorized by law
after the effective date of the loss of such program authority. DHCS must adjust
Capitation Payments to remove costs that are specific to any State program or
activity receiving FFP that is no longer authorized by law to receive FFP. If
Contractor works on a State program or activity receiving FFP that is no longer
authorized by law after the date the legal authority for the work ends, Contractor
will not be paid for that work. If DHCS has paid Contractor in advance to work on
a no-longer-authorized State program or activity receiving FFP and under the
terms of this contract the work was to be performed after the date the legal
authority ended, the payment for that work should be returned to
DHCS. However, if Contractor worked on a State program or activity receiving
FFP prior to the date legal authority ended for that State program or activity
receiving FFP, and DHCS included the cost of performing that work in its
payments to Contractor, Contractor may keep the payment for that work even if
the payment was made after the date the State program or activity receiving FFP
lost legal authority.
1.1.17 Community Reinvestment
A. Contractor must demonstrate a commitment to the local communities in
which it operates through community reinvestment activities including
contributing a set percentage of its annual net income under this Contract
to community reinvestment, in accordance with the plan developed
pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.7 (Community
Reinvestment Plan and Report). This requirement is effective following
Contractor’s first year of operation as a Medi-Cal Managed Care Health
Plan, as determined by DHCS. The percentage of Contractor’s annual net
income required to be contributed must be:
[[page 504]]
Exhibit B
Page 504 of 642
1) 5 percent of the portion of Contractor’s annual net income that is
less than or equal to 7.5 percent of Contract Revenues for the year;
and
2) 7.5 percent of the portion of Contractor’s annual net income that is
greater than 7.5 percent of Contract Revenues for the year.
B. If Contractor has a Fully Delegated Subcontractor or Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractor, Contractor must require all of its Fully
Delegated Subcontractors or Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractors
to demonstrate a commitment to the local communities in which it
operates through community reinvestment activities including contributing
a set percentage of the Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s or Downstream
Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s annual net income under the Fully
Delegated Subcontractor’s Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor’s Downstream Subcontractor Agreement that is attributable
to Members covered under this Contract to community reinvestment, in
accordance with the plan developed pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Subsection 1.2.7 (Community Reinvestment Plan and Report). This
requirement is effective following Contractor’s first year of operation as a
Medi-Cal Managed Care Health Plan, as determined by DHCS. The
percentage of the Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s or Downstream Fully
Delegated Subcontractor’s annual net income required to be contributed
must be:
1) 5 percent of the portion of the Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s or
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s annual net income
that is less than or equal to 7.5 percent of the amount the Fully
Delegated Subcontractor or Downstream Fully Delegated
Subcontractor is paid under its Subcontractor Agreement or
Downstream Subcontractor Agreement with Contractor for the year;
and
2) 7.5 percent of the portion of the Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s or
Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor’s annual net income
that is greater than 7.5 percent of the amount the Fully Delegated
Subcontractor or Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor is
paid under its Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement with Contractor for the year.
1.1.18 Quality Achievement Requirement
If Contractor does not meet quality outcome metrics as defined through an APL
or similar guidance, it must contribute an additional 7.5 percent of its annual net
income under this Contract to community reinvestment in accordance with the
[[page 505]]
Exhibit B
Page 505 of 642
plan developed pursuant to Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 1.2.7
(Community Reinvestment Plan and Report).
1.1.19 Enhanced Care Management Risk Corridor
A Risk Sharing Mechanism will be in effect for each of the Rating Periods
covering dates of services from January 1, 2022, through December 31, 2025.
A. The Risk Sharing Mechanism described in this provision may result in
payment by the State to Contractor or by Contractor to the State in a form
and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other technical guidance.
B. The Risk Sharing Mechanism will be symmetrical and based on the results
of an Enhanced Care Management (ECM) risk corridor calculation
performed in a form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or
other technical guidance, aggregated across applicable Medi-Cal
Managed Care contracts between Contractor and the State for those
capitation increments, services, and populations associated with ECM, as
determined by DHCS.
C. Contractor must provide and certify allowable medical expense data as
necessary for the ECM risk corridor calculation in a form and manner
specified by DHCS. The data and any related substantiating
documentation may be subject to review and adjustment at DHCS’
discretion in a form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other
technical guidance, and may be subject to audit by the State or its
designee.
D. DHCS or its designee will initiate the ECM Risk Corridor calculation for a
given Rating Period no sooner than 12 months after the end of the
applicable Rating Period.
1.1.20 Federally Qualified Health Center Alternative Payment Model Risk Corridor
A Risk Sharing Mechanism will be in effect for each of the Rating Periods that the
Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) Alternative Payment Model (APM) is in
effect in accordance with W&I section 14138.16.
A. The Risk Sharing Mechanism described in this Subsection may result in
payment by the State to Contractor or by Contractor to the State in a form
and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other technical guidance.
B. The Risk Sharing Mechanism will be symmetrical and based on the results
of an FQHC APM risk corridor calculation performed in a form and manner
specified by DHCS through APLs or other technical guidance, aggregated
across applicable Medi-Cal managed care contracts between Contractor
[[page 506]]
Exhibit B
Page 506 of 642
and the State for those capitation increments, services, and populations
associated with the FQHC APM, as determined by DHCS.
C. Contractor must provide and certify allowable medical expense data as
necessary for the FQHC APM risk corridor calculation in a form and
manner specified by DHCS. The data and any related substantiating
documentation may be subject to review and adjustment at DHCS’
discretion in a form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other
technical guidance, and may be subject to audit by the State or its
designee.
D. DHCS or its designee will initiate the FQHC APM Risk Corridor calculation
for a given Rating Period no sooner than 12 months after the end of the
applicable Rating Period.
1.1.21 Unsatisfactory Immigration Status Risk Corridor
A Risk Sharing Mechanism will be in effect for each of the Rating Periods
covering dates of services from January 1, 2024, through December 31, 2024.
A. The Risk Sharing Mechanism described in this Subsection may result in
payment by the State to Contractor or by Contractor to the State in a form
and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other technical guidance.
B. The Risk Sharing Mechanism will be symmetrical and based on the results
of an Unsatisfactory Immigration Status (UIS) risk corridor calculation
performed in a form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or
other technical guidance, aggregated across applicable Medi-Cal
managed care contracts between Contractor and the State for those
capitation increments, services, and populations associated with UIS, as
determined by DHCS.
C. Contractor must provide and certify allowable medical expense data as
necessary for the UIS risk corridor calculation in a form and manner
specified by DHCS. The data and any related substantiating
documentation may be subject to review and adjustment at DHCS’
discretion in a form and manner specified by DHCS through APLs or other
technical guidance, and may be subject to audit by the State or its
designee.
D. DHCS or its designee will initiate the UIS risk corridor calculation for a
given Rating Period no sooner than 12 months after the end of the
applicable Rating Period.
[[page 507]]
Medi-Cal Managed Care Plans
2024-C MCP Amendment
[Contractor Name]
[Contract #]
Exhibit C
Page 507 of 642
Exhibit C – General Terms and Conditions
The entire General Terms and Conditions (GTC 04/2017) developed by the California
Department of General Services (DGS) (“Exhibit C”) is not included in this Contract.
Instead, applicable terms and provisions from Exhibit C have been incorporated
throughout this Contract.
In the event that DGS amends Exhibit C after the effective date of the Contract,
Contractor agrees that DHCS, in its sole discretion, may incorporate future DGS
amendments into this Contract through the issuance of an All Plan Letter (APL) or other
similar instructions.
[[page 508]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 508 of 642
Exhibit D(f) – Special Terms and Conditions
This is version (Rev. 10/22)
[[page 509]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 509 of 642
Exhibit D(f)
Special Terms and Conditions
(For federally funded service contracts or agreements and grant agreements)
The use of headings or titles throughout this exhibit is for convenience only and not be
used to interpret or to govern the meaning of any specific term or condition.
The terms "contract", "Contractor" and "Subcontractor" shall also mean, “agreement”,
"grant", “grant agreement”, "Grantee" and "Subgrantee" respectively.
The terms “California Department of Health Care Services”, “California Department of
Health Services”, ‘Department of Health Care Services”, “Department of Health Services”,
“CDHCS”, “DHCS”, “CDHS”, and “DHS” shall all have the same meaning and refer to the
California State agency that is a party to this Agreement.
This exhibit contains provisions that require strict adherence to various contracting laws
and policies. Some provisions herein are conditional and only apply if specified conditions
exist (i.e., agreement total exceeds a certain amount; agreement is federally funded, etc.).
The provisions herein apply to this Agreement unless the provisions are removed by
reference on the face of this Agreement, the provisions are superseded by an alternate
provision appearing elsewhere in this Agreement, or the applicable conditions do not
exist.
[[page 510]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 510 of 642
Index of Special Terms and Conditions
1. Federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Requirements
2. Travel and Per Diem
Reimbursement
3. Procurement Rules
4. Equipment Ownership / Inventory /
Disposition
5. Subcontract Requirements
6. Income Restrictions
7. Audit and Record Retention
8. Site Inspection
9. Federal Contract Funds
10. Termination
11. Intellectual Property Rights
12. Air or Water Pollution Requirements
13. Prior Approval of Training Seminars,
Workshops or Conferences
14. Confidentiality of Information
15. Documents, Publications, and
Written Reports
16. Dispute Resolution Process
17. Financial and Compliance Audit
Requirements
18. Human Subjects Use Requirements
19. Novation Requirements
20. Debarment and Suspension
Certification
21. Smoke-Free Workplace Certification
22. Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988
23. Covenant Against Contingent Fees
24. Payment Withholds
25. Performance Evaluation
26. Officials Not to Benefit
27. Four-Digit Date Compliance
28. Prohibited Use of State Funds for
Software
29. Use of Disabled Veteran’s Business
Enterprises (DVBE)
30. Use of Small, Minority Owned and
Women's Businesses
31. Alien Ineligibility Certification
32. Union Organizing
33. Contract Uniformity (Fringe Benefit
Allowability)
34. Suspension or Stop Work
Notification
35. Public Communications
36. Compliance with Statutes and
Regulations
37. Lobbying Restrictions and
Disclosure Certification
[[page 511]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 511 of 642
1. Federal Equal Opportunity Requirements
(Applicable to all federally funded agreements entered into by the Department of
Health Care Services)
a. The Contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, disability, age or status as a disabled veteran or veteran of the
Vietnam era. The Contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that qualified
applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment,
without regard to their race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, disability, age or status as a disabled veteran or veteran of the
Vietnam era. Such action include, but not be limited to the following:
employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment
advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation;
and career development opportunities and selection for training, including
apprenticeship. The Contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available
to employees and applicants for employment, notices to be provided by the
Federal Government or DHCS, setting forth the provisions of the Equal
Opportunity clause, Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the
affirmative action clause required by the Vietnam Era Veterans' Readjustment
Assistance Act of 1974 (38 U.S.C. 4212). Such notices state the Contractor's
obligation under the law to take affirmative action to employ and advance in
employment qualified applicants without discrimination based on their race, color,
religion, sex, national origin physical or mental handicap, disability, age or status
as a disabled veteran or veteran of the Vietnam era and the rights of applicants
and employees.
b. The Contractor will, in all solicitations or advancements for employees placed by
or on behalf of the Contractor, state that all qualified applicants will receive
consideration for employment without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national
origin physical or mental handicap, disability, age or status as a disabled veteran
or veteran of the Vietnam era.
c. The Contractor will send to each labor union or representative of workers with
which it has a collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding
a notice, to be provided by the Federal Government or the State, advising the
labor union or workers' representative of the Contractor's commitments under the
provisions herein and post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to
employees and applicants for employment.
d. The Contractor will comply with all provisions of and furnish all information and
reports required by Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended,
the Vietnam Era Veterans' Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 (38 U.S.C.
4212) and of the Federal Executive Order No. 11246 as amended, including by
Executive Order 11375, ‘Amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to Equal
Employment Opportunity,‘ and as supplemented by regulation at 41 CFR part 60,
“Office of the Federal Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment
Opportunity, Department of Labor,” and of the rules, regulations, and relevant
orders of the Secretary of Labor.
[[page 512]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 512 of 642
e. The Contractor will furnish all information and reports required by Federal
Executive Order No. 11246 as amended, including by Executive Order 11375,
‘Amending Executive Order 11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity,‘
and as supplemented by regulation at 41 CFR part 60, “Office of Federal
Contract Compliance Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of
Labor,” and the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and by the rules, regulations, and
orders of the Secretary of Labor, or pursuant thereto, and will permit access to its
books, records, and accounts by the State and its designated representatives
and the Secretary of Labor for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance
with such rules, regulations, and orders.
f. In the event of the Contractor's noncompliance with the requirements of the
provisions herein or with any federal rules, regulations, or orders which are
referenced herein, this Agreement may be cancelled, terminated, or suspended
in whole or in part and the Contractor may be declared ineligible for further
federal and State contracts in accordance with procedures authorized in Federal
Executive Order No. 11246 as amended and such other sanctions may be
imposed and remedies invoked as provided in Federal Executive Order No.
11246 as amended, including by Executive Order 11375, ‘Amending Executive
Order 11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity,‘ and as supplemented
by regulation at 41 CFR part 60, “Office of Federal Contract Compliance
Programs, Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor,” or by rule,
regulation, or order of the Secretary of Labor, or as otherwise provided by law.
g. The Contractor will include the provisions of Paragraphs a through g in every
subcontract or purchase order unless exempted by rules, regulations, or orders
of the Secretary of Labor issued pursuant to Federal Executive Order No. 11246
as amended, including by Executive Order 11375, ‘Amending Executive Order
11246 Relating to Equal Employment Opportunity,‘ and as supplemented by
regulation at 41 CFR part 60, “Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs,
Equal Employment Opportunity, Department of Labor,” or Section 503 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or (38 U.S.C. 4212) of the Vietnam Era Veteran's
Readjustment Assistance Act, so that such provisions will be binding upon each
subcontractor or vendor. The Contractor will take such action with respect to any
subcontract or purchase order as the Director of the Office of Federal Contract
Compliance Programs or DHCS may direct as a means of enforcing such
provisions including sanctions for noncompliance provided, however, that in the
event the Contractor becomes involved in, or is threatened with litigation by a
subcontractor or vendor as a result of such direction by DHCS, the Contractor
may request in writing to DHCS, who, in turn, may request the United States to
enter into such litigation to protect the interests of the State and of the United
States.
2. Travel and Per Diem Reimbursement
(Applicable if travel and/or per diem expenses are reimbursed with agreement
funds.)
Reimbursement for travel and per diem expenses from DHCS under this Agreement
shall, unless otherwise specified in this Agreement, be at the rates currently in effect,
[[page 513]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 513 of 642
as established by the California Department of Human Resources (CalHR), for
nonrepresented State employees as stipulated in DHCS’ Travel Reimbursement
Information Exhibit. If the CalHR rates change during the term of the Agreement, the
new rates apply upon their effective date and no amendment to this Agreement shall
be necessary. Exceptions to CalHR rates may be approved by DHCS upon the
submission of a statement by the Contractor indicating that such rates are not
available to the Contractor. No travel outside the State of California shall be
reimbursed without prior authorization from DHCS. Verbal authorization should be
confirmed in writing. Written authorization may be in a form including fax or email
confirmation.
3. Procurement Rules
(Applicable to agreements in which equipment/property, commodities and/or
supplies are furnished by DHCS or expenses for said items are reimbursed by
DHCS with State or federal funds provided under the Agreement.)
a. Equipment/Property definitions
Wherever the term equipment and/or property is used, the following
definitions shall apply:
(1) Major equipment/property: A tangible or intangible item having a base unit
cost of $5,000 or more with a life expectancy of one (1) year or more and is
either furnished by DHCS or the cost is reimbursed through this Agreement.
Software and videos are examples of intangible items that meet this
definition.
(2) Minor equipment/property: A tangible item having a base unit cost of less
than $5,000 with a life expectancy of one (1) year or more and is either
furnished by DHCS or the cost is reimbursed through this Agreement.
b. Government and public entities (including State colleges/universities and
auxiliary organizations), whether acting as a contractor and/or subcontractor,
may secure all commodities, supplies, equipment and services related to such
purchases that are required in performance of this Agreement. Said
procurements are subject to Paragraphs d through h of Provision 3
c. Paragraph c of Provision 3 also apply, if equipment/property purchases are
delegated to subcontractors that are nonprofit organizations or commercial
businesses.
d. Nonprofit organizations and commercial businesses, whether acting as a
contractor and/or subcontractor, may secure commodities, supplies,
equipment/property and services related to such purchases for performance
under this Agreement.
(1) Equipment/property purchases not exceed $50,000 annually.
[[page 514]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 514 of 642
To secure equipment/property above the annual maximum limit of
$50,000, the Contractor make arrangements through the appropriate
DHCS Program Contract Manager, to have all remaining
equipment/property purchased through DHCS’ Purchasing Unit. The cost
of equipment/property purchased by or through DHCS be deducted from
the funds available in this Agreement. Contractor submit to the DHCS
Program Contract Manager a list of equipment/property specifications for
those items that the State must procure. DHCS may pay the vendor
directly for such arranged equipment/property purchases and title to the
equipment/property will remain with DHCS. The equipment/property will
be delivered to the Contractor's address, as stated on the face of the
Agreement, unless the Contractor notifies the DHCS Program Contract
Manager, in writing, of an alternate delivery address.
(2) All equipment/property purchases are subject to Paragraphs d through h of
Provision 3. Paragraph b of Provision 3 also apply, if equipment/property
purchases are delegated to Subcontractors that are either a government or
public entity.
(3) Nonprofit organizations and commercial businesses use a procurement
system that meets the following standards:
(a) Maintain a code or standard of conduct that govern the performance of its
officers, employees, or agents engaged in awarding procurement
contracts. No employee, officer, or agent shall participate in the selection,
award, or administration of a procurement, or bid contract in which, to his
or her knowledge, he or she has a financial interest.
(b) Procurements be conducted in a manner that provides, to the maximum
extent practical, open, and free competition.
(c) Procurements be conducted in a manner that provides for all of the
following:
[1] Avoid purchasing unnecessary or duplicate items.
[2] Equipment/property solicitations be based upon a clear and accurate
description of the technical requirements of the goods to be procured.
[3] Take positive steps to utilize small and veteran owned businesses.
e. Unless waived or otherwise stipulated in writing by DHCS, prior written
authorization from the appropriate DHCS Program Contract Manager will be
required before the Contractor will be reimbursed for any purchase of $5,000 or
more for commodities, supplies, equipment/property, and services related to
such purchases. The Contractor must provide in its request for authorization all
particulars necessary, as specified by DHCS, for evaluating the necessity or
desirability of incurring such costs. The term "purchase" excludes the purchase
of services from a subcontractor and public utility services at rates established for
uniform applicability to the general public.
f. In special circumstances, determined by DHCS (e.g., when DHCS has a need to
[[page 515]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 515 of 642
monitor certain purchases, etc.), DHCS may require prior written authorization
and/or the submission of paid vendor receipts for any purchase, regardless of
dollar amount. DHCS reserves the right to either deny claims for reimbursement
or to request repayment for any Contractor and/or subcontractor purchase that
DHCS determines to be unnecessary in carrying out performance under this
Agreement.
g. The Contractor and/or subcontractor must maintain a copy or narrative
description of the procurement system, guidelines, rules, or regulations that will
be used to make purchases under this Agreement. The State reserves the right
to request a copy of these documents and to inspect the purchasing practices of
the Contractor and/or subcontractor at any time.
h. For all purchases, the Contractor and/or subcontractor must maintain copies of
all paid vendor invoices, documents, bids and other information used in vendor
selection, for inspection or audit. Justifications supporting the absence of bidding
(i.e., sole source purchases) also be maintained on file by the Contractor and/or
subcontractor for inspection or audit.
i. DHCS may, with cause (e.g., with reasonable suspicion of unnecessary
purchases or use of inappropriate purchase practices, etc.), withhold, cancel,
modify, or retract the delegated purchase authority granted under Paragraphs b
and/or c of Provision 3 by giving the Contractor no less than 30 calendar days
written notice.
4. Equipment/Property Ownership / Inventory / Disposition
(Applicable to agreements in which equipment/property is furnished by DHCS and/or
when said items are purchased or reimbursed by DHCS with State or federal funds
provided under the Agreement.)
a. Wherever the term equipment and/or property is used in Provision 4, the
definitions in Paragraph a of Provision 3 apply.
Unless otherwise stipulated in this Agreement, all equipment and/or property that
is purchased/reimbursed with agreement funds or furnished by DHCS under the
terms of this Agreement be considered State equipment and the property of
DHCS.
(1) Reporting of Equipment/Property Receipt
DHCS requires the reporting, tagging and annual inventorying of all
equipment and/or property that is furnished by DHCS or
purchased/reimbursed with funds provided through this Agreement.
Upon receipt of equipment and/or property, the Contractor report the receipt
to the DHCS Program Contract Manager. To report the receipt of said items
and to receive property tags, Contractor use a form or format designated by
DHCS’ Asset Management Unit. If the appropriate form (i.e., Contractor
Equipment Purchased with DHCS Funds) does not accompany this
Agreement, Contractor request a copy from the DHCS Program Contract
[[page 516]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 516 of 642
Manager.
(2) Annual Equipment/Property Inventory
If the Contractor enters into an agreement with a term of more than twelve
months, the Contractor submit an annual inventory of State equipment and/or
property to the DHCS Program Contract Manager using a form or format
designated by DHCS’ Asset Management Unit. If an inventory report form
(i.e., Inventory/Disposition of DHCS-Funded Equipment) does not accompany
this Agreement, Contractor request a copy from the DHCS Program Contract
Manager. Contractor:
(a) Include in the inventory report, equipment and/or property in the
Contractor's possession and/or in the possession of a subcontractor
(including independent consultants).
(b) Submit the inventory report to DHCS according to the instructions
appearing on the inventory form or issued by the DHCS Program Contract
Manager.
(c) Contact the DHCS Program Contract Manager to learn how to remove,
trade-in, sell, transfer or survey off, from the inventory report, expired
equipment and/or property that is no longer wanted, usable or has passed
its life expectancy. Instructions will be supplied by either the DHCS
Program Contract Manager or DHCS’ Asset Management Unit.
b. Title to State equipment and/or property not be affected by its incorporation or
attachment to any property not owned by the State.
c. Unless otherwise stipulated, DHCS be under no obligation to pay the cost of
restoration, or rehabilitation of the Contractor's and/or Subcontractor's facility
which may be affected by the removal of any State equipment and/or property.
d. The Contractor and/or Subcontractor maintain and administer a sound business
program for ensuring the proper use, maintenance, repair, protection, insurance
and preservation of State equipment and/or property.
(1) In administering this provision, DHCS may require the Contractor and/or
Subcontractor to repair or replace, to DHCS’ satisfaction, any damaged, lost
or stolen State equipment and/or property. In the event of State equipment
and/or miscellaneous property theft, Contractor and/or Subcontractor
immediately file a theft report with the appropriate police agency or the
California Highway Patrol and Contractor promptly submit one copy of the
theft report to the DHCS Program Contract Manager.
e. Unless otherwise stipulated by the Program funding this Agreement, equipment
and/or property purchased/reimbursed with agreement funds or furnished by
DHCS under the terms of this Agreement, only be used for performance of this
Agreement or another DHCS agreement.
Within sixty (60) calendar days prior to the termination or end of this Agreement,
[[page 517]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 517 of 642
the Contractor provide a final inventory report of equipment and/or property to the
DHCS Program Contract Manager and, at that time, query DHCS as to the
requirements, including the manner and method, of returning State equipment
and/or property to DHCS. Final disposition of equipment and/or property be at
DHCS expense and according to DHCS instructions. Equipment and/or property
disposition instructions be issued by DHCS immediately after receipt of the final
inventory report. At the termination or conclusion of this Agreement, DHCS may
at its discretion, authorize the continued use of State equipment and/or property
for performance of work under a different DHCS agreement.
f. Motor Vehicles
(Applicable only if motor vehicles are purchased/reimbursed with agreement
funds or furnished by DHCS under this Agreement.)
(1) If motor vehicles are purchased/reimbursed with agreement funds or
furnished by DHCS under the terms of this Agreement, within thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the termination or end of this Agreement, the
Contractor and/or Subcontractor return such vehicles to DHCS and deliver all
necessary documents of title or registration to enable the proper transfer of a
marketable title to DHCS.
(2) If motor vehicles are purchased/reimbursed with agreement funds or
furnished by DHCS under the terms of this Agreement, the State of California
be the legal owner of said motor vehicles and the Contractor be the registered
owner. The Contractor and/or a subcontractor may only use said vehicles for
performance and under the terms of this Agreement.
(3) The Contractor and/or Subcontractor agree that all operators of motor
vehicles, purchased/reimbursed with agreement funds or furnished by DHCS
under the terms of this Agreement, hold a valid State of California driver's
license. In the event that ten or more passengers are to be transported in any
one vehicle, the operator also hold a State of California Class B driver's
license.
(4) If any motor vehicle is purchased/reimbursed with agreement funds or
furnished by DHCS under the terms of this Agreement, the Contractor and/or
Subcontractor, as applicable, provide, maintain, and certify that, at a
minimum, the following type and amount of automobile liability insurance is in
effect during the term of this Agreement or any extension period during which
any vehicle remains in the Contractor's and/or Subcontractor's possession:
Automobile Liability Insurance
(a) The Contractor, by signing this Agreement, hereby certifies that it
possesses or will obtain automobile liability insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage
combined. Said insurance must be obtained and made effective upon the
delivery date of any motor vehicle, purchased/reimbursed with agreement
funds or furnished by DHCS under the terms of this Agreement, to the
[[page 518]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 518 of 642
Contractor and/or Subcontractor.
(b) The Contractor and/or Subcontractor, as soon as practical, furnish a copy
of the certificate of insurance to the DHCS Program Contract Manager.
The certificate of insurance identify the DHCS contract or agreement
number for which the insurance applies.
(c) The Contractor and/or Subcontractor agree that bodily injury and property
damage liability insurance, as required herein, remain in effect at all times
during the term of this Agreement or until such time as the motor vehicle is
returned to DHCS.
(d) The Contractor and/or Subcontractor agree to provide, at least thirty (30)
days prior to the expiration date of said insurance coverage, a copy of a
new certificate of insurance evidencing continued coverage, as indicated
herein, for not less than the remainder of the term of this Agreement, the
term of any extension or continuation thereof, or for a period of not less
than one (1) year.
(e) The Contractor and/or Subcontractor, if not a self-insured government
and/or public entity, must provide evidence, that any required certificates
of insurance contain the following provisions:
[1] The insurer will not cancel the insured's coverage without giving thirty
(30) calendar days prior written notice to the State (California
Department of Health Care Services).
[2] The State of California, its officers, agents, employees, and servants
are included as additional insureds, but only with respect to work
performed for the State under this Agreement and any extension or
continuation of this Agreement.
[3] The insurance carrier notify the California Department of Health Care
Services (DHCS), in writing, of the Contractor's failure to pay
premiums; its cancellation of such policies; or any other substantial
change, including, but not limited to, the status, coverage, or scope of
the required insurance. Such notices contain a reference to each
agreement number for which the insurance was obtained.
(f) The Contractor and/or Subcontractor is hereby advised that copies of
certificates of insurance may be subject to review and approval by the
Department of General Services (DGS), Office of Risk and Insurance
Management. The Contractor be notified by DHCS, in writing, if this
provision is applicable to this Agreement. If DGS approval of the certificate
of insurance is required, the Contractor agrees that no work or services
shall be performed prior to obtaining said approval.
(g) In the event the Contractor and/or Subcontractor fails to keep insurance
coverage, as required herein, in effect at all times during vehicle
possession, DHCS may, in addition to any other remedies it may have,
[[page 519]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 519 of 642
terminate this Agreement upon the occurrence of such event.
5. Subcontract Requirements
(Applicable to agreements under which services are to be performed by
subcontractors including independent consultants.)
a. Prior written authorization will be required before the Contractor enters into or is
reimbursed for any subcontract for services costing $5,000 or more. Except as
indicated in Paragraph a(3) herein, when securing subcontracts for services
exceeding $5,000, the Contractor obtain at least three bids or justify a sole
source award.
(1) The Contractor must provide in its request for authorization, all information
necessary for evaluating the necessity or desirability of incurring such cost.
(2) DHCS may identify the information needed to fulfill this requirement.
(3) Subcontracts performed by the following entities or for the service types listed
below are exempt from the bidding and sole source justification requirements:
(a) A local governmental entity or the federal government,
(b) A State college or State university from any State,
(c) A Joint Powers Authority,
(d) An auxiliary organization of a California State University or a California
community college,
(e) A foundation organized to support the Board of Governors of the California
Community Colleges,
(f) An auxiliary organization of the Student Aid Commission established
under Education Code § 69522,
(g) Firms or individuals proposed for use and approved by DHCS’ funding
Program via acceptance of an application or proposal for funding or
pre/post contract award negotiations,
(h) Entities and/or service types identified as exempt from advertising and
competitive bidding in
State Contracting Manual Chapter 5 Section 5.80
Subsection B.2.
b. DHCS reserves the right to approve or disapprove the selection of
subcontractors and with advance written notice, require the substitution of
subcontractors and require the Contractor to terminate subcontracts entered into
in support of this Agreement.
(1) Upon receipt of a written notice from DHCS requiring the substitution and/or
termination of a subcontract, the Contractor take steps to ensure the
[[page 520]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 520 of 642
completion of any work in progress and select a replacement, if applicable,
within 30 calendar days, unless a longer period is agreed to by DHCS.
c. Actual subcontracts (i.e., written agreement between the Contractor and a
subcontractor) of $5,000 or more are subject to the prior review and written
approval of DHCS. DHCS may, at its discretion, elect to waive this right. All such
waivers be confirmed in writing by DHCS.
d. Contractor maintain a copy of each subcontract entered into in support of this
Agreement and, upon request by DHCS, make copies available for approval,
inspection, or audit.
e. DHCS assumes no responsibility for the payment of subcontractors used in the
performance of this Agreement. Contractor accepts sole responsibility for the
payment of subcontractors used in the performance of this Agreement.
f. The Contractor is responsible for all performance requirements under this
Agreement even though performance may be carried out through a subcontract.
g. The Contractor ensure that all subcontracts for services include provision(s)
requiring compliance with applicable terms and conditions specified in this
Agreement.
h. The Contractor agrees to include the following clause, relevant to record
retention, in all subcontracts for services:
"(Subcontractor Name) agrees to maintain and preserve, until three years after
termination of (Agreement Number) and final payment from DHCS to the
Contractor, to permit DHCS or any duly authorized representative, to have
access to, examine or audit any pertinent books, documents, papers and records
related to this subcontract and to allow interviews of any employees who might
reasonably have information related to such records."
i. Unless otherwise stipulated in writing by DHCS, the Contractor be the
subcontractor's sole point of contact for all matters related to performance and
payment under this Agreement.
j. Contractor, as applicable, advise all subcontractors of their obligations pursuant
to the following numbered provisions of this Exhibit: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 24, 32 and/or other numbered provisions herein that are
deemed applicable.
6. Income Restrictions
Unless otherwise stipulated in this Agreement, the Contractor agrees that any
refunds, rebates, credits, or other amounts (including any interest thereon) accruing
to or received by the Contractor under this Agreement be paid by the Contractor to
DHCS, to the extent that they are properly allocable to costs for which the Contractor
has been reimbursed by DHCS under this Agreement.
[[page 521]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 521 of 642
7. Audit and Record Retention
(Applicable to agreements in excess of $10,000.)
a. The Contractor and/or Subcontractor maintain books, records, documents, and
other evidence, accounting procedures and practices, sufficient to properly reflect
all direct and indirect costs of whatever nature claimed to have been incurred in
the performance of this Agreement, including any matching costs and expenses.
The foregoing constitutes "records" for the purpose of this provision.
b. The Contractor's and/or subcontractor's facility or office or such part thereof as
may be engaged in the performance of this Agreement and his/her records be
subject at all reasonable times to inspection, audit, and reproduction.
c. Contractor agrees that DHCS, the Department of General Services, the Bureau
of State Audits, or their designated representatives including the Comptroller
General of the United States have the right to review and to copy any records
and supporting documentation pertaining to the performance of this Agreement.
Contractor agrees to allow the auditor(s) access to such records during normal
business hours and to allow interviews of any employees who might reasonably
have information related to such records. Further, the Contractor agrees to
include a similar right of the State to audit records and interview staff in any
subcontract related to performance of this Agreement. (Government Code
Section 8546.7, Public Contract Code (PCC) Sections 10115 et seq., Code of
California Regulations Title 2, Section 1896.77.) The Contractor comply with the
above and be aware of the penalties for violations of fraud and for obstruction of
investigation as set forth in PCC Section10115.10.
d. The Contractor and/or Subcontractor preserve and make available his/her
records (1) for a period of six years for all records related to Disabled Veteran
Business Enterprise (DVBE) participation (Military and Veterans Code 999.55), if
this Agreement involves DVBE participation, and three years for all other
contract records from the date of final payment under this Agreement, and (2) for
such longer period, if any, as is required by applicable statute, by any other
provision of this Agreement, or by subparagraphs (1) or (2) below.
(1) If this Agreement is completely or partially terminated, the records relating to
the work terminated be preserved and made available for a period of three
years from the date of any resulting final settlement.
(2) If any litigation, claim, negotiation, audit, or other action involving the records
has been started before the expiration of the three-year period, the records be
retained until completion of the action and resolution of all issues which arise
from it, or until the end of the regular three-year period, whichever is later.
e. The Contractor and/or Subcontractor may, at its discretion, following receipt of
final payment under this Agreement, reduce its accounts, books and records
related to this Agreement to microfilm, computer disk, CD ROM, DVD, or other
data storage medium. Upon request by an authorized representative to inspect,
audit or obtain copies of said records, the Contractor and/or Subcontractor must
[[page 522]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 522 of 642
supply or make available applicable devices, hardware, and/or software
necessary to view, copy and/or print said records. Applicable devices may
include, but are not limited to, microfilm readers and microfilm printers, etc.
f. The Contractor, if applicable, comply with the Single Audit Act and the audit
requirements set forth in 2 C.F.R. § 200.501 (2014).
8. Site Inspection
The State, through any authorized representatives, has the right at all reasonable
times to inspect or otherwise evaluate the work performed or being performed
hereunder including subcontract supported activities and the premises in which it is
being performed. If any inspection or evaluation is made of the premises of the
Contractor or Subcontractor, the Contractor provide and require Subcontractors to
provide all reasonable facilities and assistance for the safety and convenience of the
authorized representatives in the performance of their duties. All inspections and
evaluations be performed in such a manner as will not unduly delay the work.
9. Federal Contract Funds
(Applicable only to that portion of an agreement funded in part or whole with federal
funds.)
a. It is mutually understood between the parties that this Agreement may have been
written before ascertaining the availability of congressional appropriation of
funds, for the mutual benefit of both parties, in order to avoid program and fiscal
delays which would occur if the Agreement were executed after that
determination was made.
b. This agreement is valid and enforceable only if sufficient funds are made
available to the State by the United States Government for the fiscal years
covered by the term of this Agreement. In addition, this Agreement is subject to
any additional restrictions, limitations, or conditions enacted by the Congress or
any statute enacted by the Congress which may affect the provisions, terms or
funding of this Agreement in any manner.
c. It is mutually agreed that if the Congress does not appropriate sufficient funds for
the program, this Agreement be amended to reflect any reduction in funds.
d. DHCS has the option to invalidate or cancel the Agreement with 30-days
advance written notice or to amend the Agreement to reflect any reduction in
funds.
10. Termination
a. For Cause
The State may terminate this Agreement, in whole or in part, and be relieved of
any payments should the Contractor fail to perform the requirements of this
Agreement at the time and in the manner herein provided. In the event of such
termination, the State may proceed with the work in any manner deemed proper
[[page 523]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 523 of 642
by the State. All costs to the State be deducted from any sum due the Contractor
under this Agreement and the balance, if any, be paid to the Contractor upon
demand. If this Agreement is terminated, in whole or in part, the State may
require the Contractor to transfer title, or in the case of licensed software, license,
and deliver to the State any completed deliverables, partially completed
deliverables, and any other materials, related to the terminated portion of the
Contract, including but not limited to, computer programs, data files, user and
operations manuals, system and program documentation, training programs
related to the operation and maintenance of the system, and all information
necessary for the reimbursement of any outstanding Medicaid claims. The State
pay contract price for completed deliverables delivered and accepted and items
the State requires the Contractor to transfer as described in this paragraph
above.
b. For Convenience
The State retains the option to terminate this Agreement, in whole or in part,
without cause, at the State’s convenience, without penalty, provided that written
notice has been delivered to the Contractor at least ninety (90) calendar days
prior to such termination date. In the event of termination, in whole or in part,
under this paragraph, the State may require the Contractor to transfer title, or in
the case of licensed software, license, and deliver to the State any completed
deliverables, partially completed deliverables, and any other materials related to
the terminated portion of the contract including but not limited to, computer
programs, data files, user and operations manuals, system and program
documentation, training programs related to the operation and maintenance of
the system, and all information necessary for the reimbursement of any
outstanding Medicaid claims. The Contractor will be entitled to compensation
upon submission of an invoice and proper proof of claim for the services and
products satisfactorily rendered, subject to all payment provisions of the
Agreement. Payment is limited to expenses necessarily incurred pursuant to this
Agreement up to the date of termination.
11. Intellectual Property Rights
a. Ownership
(1) Except where DHCS has agreed in a signed writing to accept a license,
DHCS be and remain, without additional compensation, the sole owner of
any and all rights, title and interest in all Intellectual Property, from the
moment of creation, whether or not jointly conceived, that are made,
conceived, derived from, or reduced to practice by Contractor or DHCS
and which result directly or indirectly from this Agreement.
(2) For the purposes of this Agreement, Intellectual Property means
recognized protectable rights and interest such as: patents, (whether or
not issued) copyrights, trademarks, service marks, applications for any of
the foregoing, inventions, trade secrets, trade dress, logos, insignia, color
combinations, slogans, moral rights, right of publicity, author’s rights,
contract and licensing rights, works, mask works, industrial design rights,
[[page 524]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 524 of 642
rights of priority, know how, design flows, methodologies, devices,
business processes, developments, innovations, good will and all other
legal rights protecting intangible proprietary information as may exist now
and/or here after come into existence, and all renewals and extensions,
regardless of whether those rights arise under the laws of the United
States, or any other state, country or jurisdiction.
(a) For the purposes of the definition of Intellectual Property, “works” means
all literary works, writings and printed matter including the medium by
which they are recorded or reproduced, photographs, art work, pictorial
and graphic representations and works of a similar nature, film, motion
pictures, digital images, animation cells, and other audiovisual works
including positives and negatives thereof, sound recordings, tapes,
educational materials, interactive videos and any other materials or
products created, produced, conceptualized and fixed in a tangible
medium of expression. It includes preliminary and final products and any
materials and information developed for the purposes of producing those
final products. Works does not include articles submitted to peer review or
reference journals or independent research projects.
(3) In the performance of this Agreement, Contractor will exercise and utilize
certain of its Intellectual Property in existence prior to the effective date of
this Agreement. In addition, under this Agreement, Contractor may
access and utilize certain of DHCS’ Intellectual Property in existence prior
to the effective date of this Agreement. Except as otherwise set forth
herein, Contractor not use any of DHCS’ Intellectual Property now
existing or hereafter existing for any purposes without the prior written
permission of DHCS. Except as otherwise set forth herein, neither the
Contractor nor DHCS give any ownership interest in or rights to its
Intellectual Property to the other Party. If during the term of this
Agreement, Contractor accesses any third-party Intellectual Property that
is licensed to DHCS, Contractor agrees to abide by all license and
confidentiality restrictions applicable to DHCS in the third-party’s license
agreement.
(4) Contractor agrees to cooperate with DHCS in establishing or maintaining
DHCS’ exclusive rights in the Intellectual Property, and in assuring
DHCS’ sole rights against third parties with respect to the Intellectual
Property. If the Contractor enters into any agreements or subcontracts
with other parties in order to perform this Agreement, Contractor require
the terms of the Agreement(s) to include all Intellectual Property
provisions. Such terms must include, but are not limited to, the
subcontractor assigning and agreeing to assign to DHCS all rights, title
and interest in Intellectual Property made, conceived, derived from, or
reduced to practice by the subcontractor, Contractor or DHCS and which
result directly or indirectly from this Agreement or any subcontract.
(5) Contractor further agrees to assist and cooperate with DHCS in all
reasonable respects, and execute all documents and, subject to
reasonable availability, give testimony and take all further acts
[[page 525]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 525 of 642
reasonably necessary to acquire, transfer, maintain, and enforce DHCS’
Intellectual Property rights and interests.
b. Retained Rights / License Rights
(1) Except for Intellectual Property made, conceived, derived from, or reduced to
practice by Contractor or DHCS and which result directly or indirectly from
this Agreement, Contractor retain title to all of its Intellectual Property to the
extent such Intellectual Property is in existence prior to the effective date of
this Agreement. Contractor hereby grants to DHCS, without additional
compensation, a permanent, non-exclusive, royalty free, paid-up, worldwide,
irrevocable, perpetual, non-terminable license to use, reproduce,
manufacture, sell, offer to sell, import, export, modify, publicly and privately
display/perform, distribute, and dispose Contractor’s Intellectual Property with
the right to sublicense through multiple layers, for any purpose whatsoever, to
the extent it is incorporated in the Intellectual Property resulting from this
Agreement, unless Contractor assigns all rights, title and interest in the
Intellectual Property as set forth herein.
(2) Nothing in this provision shall restrict, limit, or otherwise prevent Contractor
from using any ideas, concepts, know-how, methodology or techniques
related to its performance under this Agreement, provided that Contractor’s
use does not infringe the patent, copyright, trademark rights, license or other
Intellectual Property rights of DHCS or third party, or result in a breach or
default of any provisions of this Exhibit or result in a breach of any provisions
of law relating to confidentiality.
c. Copyright
(1) Contractor agrees that for purposes of copyright law, all works [as defined in
Paragraph a, subparagraph (2)(a) of this provision] of authorship made by or
on behalf of Contractor in connection with Contractor’s performance of this
Agreement be deemed “works made for hire”. Contractor further agrees that
the work of each person utilized by Contractor in connection with the
performance of this Agreement will be a “work made for hire,” whether that
person is an employee of Contractor or that person has entered into an
agreement with Contractor to perform the work. Contractor enter into a written
agreement with any such person that: (i) all work performed for Contractor be
deemed a “work made for hire” under the Copyright Act and (ii) that person
assign all right, title, and interest to DHCS to any work product made,
conceived, derived from, or reduced to practice by Contractor or DHCS and
which result directly or indirectly from this Agreement.
(2) All materials, including, but not limited to, visual works or text, reproduced or
distributed pursuant to this Agreement that include Intellectual Property made,
conceived, derived from, or reduced to practice by Contractor or DHCS and
which result directly or indirectly from this Agreement, include DHCS’ notice
of copyright, which read in 3mm or larger typeface: “© [Enter Current Year
e.g., 2010, etc.], California Department of Health Care Services. This material
may not be reproduced or disseminated without prior written permission from
the California Department of Health Care Services.” This notice should be
[[page 526]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 526 of 642
placed prominently on the materials and set apart from other matter on the
page where it appears. Audio productions contain a similar audio notice of
copyright.
d. Patent Rights
With respect to inventions made by Contractor in the performance of this
Agreement, which did not result from research and development specifically
included in the Agreement’s scope of work, Contractor hereby grants to DHCS a
license as described under Section b of this provision for devices or material
incorporating, or made through the use of such inventions. If such inventions
result from research and development work specifically included within the
Agreement’s scope of work, then Contractor agrees to assign to DHCS, without
additional compensation, all its right, title and interest in and to such inventions
and to assist DHCS in securing United States and foreign patents with respect
thereto.
e. Third-Party Intellectual Property
Except as provided herein, Contractor agrees that its performance of this
Agreement not be dependent upon or include any Intellectual Property of
Contractor or third party without first: (i) obtaining DHCS’ prior written approval;
and (ii) granting to or obtaining for DHCS, without additional compensation, a
license, as described in Section b of this provision, for any of Contractor’s or
third-party’s Intellectual Property in existence prior to the effective date of this
Agreement. If such a license upon these terms is unattainable, and DHCS
determines that the Intellectual Property should be included in or is required for
Contractor’s performance of this Agreement, Contractor obtain a license under
terms acceptable to DHCS.
f. Warranties
(1) Contractor represents and warrants that:
(a) It is free to enter into and fully perform this Agreement.
(b) It has secured and will secure all rights and licenses necessary for its
performance of this Agreement.
(c) Neither Contractor’s performance of this Agreement, nor the exercise by
either Party of the rights granted in this Agreement, nor any use,
reproduction, manufacture, sale, offer to sell, import, export, modification,
public and private display/performance, distribution, and disposition of the
Intellectual Property made, conceived, derived from, or reduced to
practice by Contractor or DHCS and which result directly or indirectly from
this Agreement will infringe upon or violate any Intellectual Property right,
non-disclosure obligation, or other proprietary right or interest of any third-
party or entity now existing under the laws of, or hereafter existing or
issued by, any state, the United States, or any foreign country. There is
currently no actual or threatened claim by any such thirdparty based on an
alleged violation of any such right by Contractor.
[[page 527]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 527 of 642
(d) Neither Contractor’s performance nor any part of its performance will
violate the right of privacy of, or constitute a libel or slander against any
person or entity.
(e) It has secured and will secure all rights and licenses necessary for
Intellectual Property including, but not limited to, consents, waivers or
releases from all authors of music or performances used, and talent
(radio, television and motion picture talent), owners of any interest in and
to real estate, sites, locations, property or props that may be used or
shown.
(f) It has not granted and not grant to any person or entity any right that
would or might derogate, encumber, or interfere with any of the rights
granted to DHCS in this Agreement.
(g) It has appropriate systems and controls in place to ensure that State funds
will not be used in the performance of this Agreement for the acquisition,
operation or maintenance of computer software in violation of copyright
laws.
(h) It has no knowledge of any outstanding claims, licenses or other charges,
liens, or encumbrances of any kind or nature whatsoever that could affect
in any way Contractor’s performance of this Agreement.
(2) DHCS makes no warranty that the intellectual property resulting from this
agreement does not infringe upon any patent, trademark, copyright or the like,
now existing or subsequently issued.
g. Intellectual Property Indemnity
(1) Contractor indemnify, defend and hold harmless DHCS and its licensees and
assignees, and its officers, directors, employees, agents, representatives,
successors, and users of its products, (“Indemnitees”) from and against all
claims, actions, damages, losses, liabilities (or actions or proceedings with
respect to any thereof), whether or not rightful, arising from any and all
actions or claims by any third party or expenses related thereto (including, but
not limited to, all legal expenses, court costs, and attorney’s fees incurred in
investigating, preparing, serving as a witness in, or defending against, any
such claim, action, or proceeding, commenced or threatened) to which any of
the Indemnitees may be subject, whether or not Contractor is a party to any
pending or threatened litigation, which arise out of or are related to (i) the
incorrectness or breach of any of the representations, warranties, covenants
or agreements of Contractor pertaining to Intellectual Property; or (ii) any
Intellectual Property infringement, or any other type of actual or alleged
infringement claim, arising out of DHCS’ use, reproduction, manufacture,
sale, offer to sell, distribution, import, export, modification, public and private
performance/display, license, and disposition of the Intellectual Property
made, conceived, derived from, or reduced to practice by Contractor or DHCS
and which result directly or indirectly from this Agreement. This indemnity
obligation apply irrespective of whether the infringement claim is based on a
[[page 528]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 528 of 642
patent, trademark or copyright registration that issued after the effective date
of this Agreement. DHCS reserves the right to participate in and/or control, at
Contractor’s expense, any such infringement action brought against DHCS.
(2) Should any Intellectual Property licensed by the Contractor to DHCS under
this Agreement become the subject of an Intellectual Property infringement
claim, Contractor will exercise its authority reasonably and in good faith to
preserve DHCS’ right to use the licensed Intellectual Property in accordance
with this Agreement at no expense to DHCS. DHCS have the right to monitor
and appear through its own counsel (at Contractor’s expense) in any such
claim or action. In the defense or settlement of the claim, Contractor may
obtain the right for DHCS to continue using the licensed Intellectual Property;
or, replace or modify the licensed Intellectual Property so that the replaced or
modified Intellectual Property becomes non-infringing provided that such
replacement or modification is functionally equivalent to the original licensed
Intellectual Property. If such remedies are not reasonably available, DHCS be
entitled to a refund of all monies paid under this Agreement, without
restriction or limitation of any other rights and remedies available at law or in
equity.
(3) Contractor agrees that damages alone would be inadequate to compensate
DHCS for breach of any term of this Intellectual Property Exhibit by
Contractor. Contractor acknowledges DHCS would suffer irreparable harm in
the event of such breach and agrees DHCS be entitled to obtain equitable
relief, including without limitation an injunction, from a court of competent
jurisdiction, without restriction or limitation of any other rights and remedies
available at law or in equity.
h. Federal Funding
In any agreement funded in whole or in part by the federal government, DHCS
may acquire and maintain the Intellectual Property rights, title, and ownership,
which results directly or indirectly from the Agreement; except as provided in 37
Code of Federal Regulations part 401.14; however, the federal government shall
have a non-exclusive, nontransferable, irrevocable, paid-up license throughout
the world to use, duplicate, or dispose of such Intellectual Property throughout
the world in any manner for governmental purposes and to have and permit
others to do so.
i. Survival
The provisions set forth herein shall survive any termination or expiration of this
Agreement or any project schedule.
12. Air or Water Pollution Requirements
Any federally funded agreement and/or subcontract in excess of $100,000 must
comply with the following provisions unless said agreement is exempt by law.
a. Government contractors agree to comply with all applicable standards, orders, or
requirements issued under section 306 of the Clean Air Act (42 USC 7606)
[[page 529]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 529 of 642
section 508 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1368), Executive Order 11738,
and Environmental Protection Agency regulations.
b. Institutions of higher education, hospitals, nonprofit organizations and
commercial businesses agree to comply with all applicable standards, orders, or
requirements issued under the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq.), as
amended, and the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended.
13. Prior Approval of Training Seminars, Workshops or Conferences
Contractor obtain prior DHCS approval of the location, costs, dates, agenda,
instructors, instructional materials, and attendees at any reimbursable training
seminar, workshop, or conference conducted pursuant to this Agreement and of any
reimbursable publicity or educational materials to be made available for distribution.
The Contractor acknowledge the support of the State whenever publicizing the work
under this Agreement in any media. This provision does not apply to necessary staff
meetings or training sessions held for the staff of the Contractor or Subcontractor to
conduct routine business matters.
14. Confidentiality of Information
a. The Contractor and its employees, agents, or subcontractors protect from
unauthorized disclosure names and other identifying information concerning
persons either receiving services pursuant to this Agreement or persons whose
names or identifying information become available or are disclosed to the
Contractor, its employees, agents, or subcontractors as a result of services
performed under this Agreement, except for statistical information not identifying
any such person.
b. The Contractor and its employees, agents, or subcontractors not use such
identifying information for any purpose other than carrying out the Contractor's
obligations under this Agreement.
c. The Contractor and its employees, agents, or subcontractors promptly transmit to
the DHCS Program Contract Manager all requests for disclosure of such
identifying information not emanating from the client or person.
d. The Contractor not disclose, except as otherwise specifically permitted by this
Agreement or authorized by the client, any such identifying information to anyone
other than DHCS without prior written authorization from the DHCS Program
Contract Manager, except if disclosure is required by State or federal law.
e. For purposes of this provision, identity include, but not be limited to name,
identifying number, symbol, or other identifying particular assigned to the
individual, such as finger or voice print or a photograph.
f. As deemed applicable by DHCS, this provision may be supplemented by
additional terms and conditions covering personal health information (PHI) or
personal, sensitive, and/or confidential information (PSCI). Said terms and
conditions will be outlined in one or more exhibits that will either be attached to
[[page 530]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 530 of 642
this Agreement or incorporated into this Agreement by reference.
15. Documents, Publications and Written Reports
(Applicable to agreements over $5,000 under which publications, written reports and
documents are developed or produced. Government Code Section 7550.)
Any document, publication or written report (excluding progress reports, financial
reports and normal contractual communications) prepared as a requirement of this
Agreement contain, in a separate section preceding the main body of the document,
the number and dollar amounts of all contracts or agreements and subcontracts
relating to the preparation of such document or report, if the total cost for work by
nonemployees of the State exceeds $5,000.
16. Dispute Resolution Process
a. A Contractor grievance exists whenever there is a dispute arising from DHCS’
action in the administration of an agreement. If there is a dispute or grievance
between the Contractor and DHCS, the Contractor must seek resolution using
the procedure outlined below.
(1) The Contractor should first informally discuss the problem with the DHCS
Program Contract Manager. If the problem cannot be resolved informally, the
Contractor direct its grievance together with any evidence, in writing, to the
program Branch Chief. The grievance state the issues in dispute, the legal
authority or other basis for the Contractor's position and the remedy sought.
The Branch Chief render a decision within ten (10) Working Days after receipt
of the written grievance from the Contractor. The Branch Chief respond in
writing to the Contractor indicating the decision and reasons therefore. If the
Contractor disagrees with the Branch Chief’s decision, the Contractor may
appeal to the second level.
(2) When appealing to the second level, the Contractor must prepare an appeal
indicating the reasons for disagreement with Branch Chief’s decision. The
Contractor must include with the appeal a copy of the Contractor's original
statement of dispute along with any supporting evidence and a copy of the
Branch Chief’s decision. The appeal be addressed to the Deputy Director of
the division in which the branch is organized within ten (10) Working Days
from receipt of the Branch Chief’s decision. The Deputy Director of the
division in which the branch is organized or his/her designee meet with the
Contractor to review the issues raised. A written decision signed by the
Deputy Director of the division in which the branch is organized or his/her
designee be directed to the Contractor within twenty (20) working days of
receipt of the Contractor's second level appeal.
b. If the Contractor wishes to appeal the decision of the Deputy Director of the
division in which the branch is organized or his/her designee, the Contractor
follow the procedures set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 100171.
c. Unless otherwise stipulated in writing by DHCS, all dispute, grievance and/or
[[page 531]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 531 of 642
appeal correspondence be directed to the DHCS Program Contract Manager.
d. There are organizational differences within DHCS’ funding programs and the
management levels identified in this dispute resolution provision may not apply in
every contractual situation. When a grievance is received and organizational
differences exist, the Contractor be notified in writing by the DHCS Program
Contract Manager of the level, name, and/or title of the appropriate management
official that is responsible for issuing a decision at a given level.
17. Financial and Compliance Audit Requirements
a. The definitions used in this provision are contained in Section 38040 of the
Health and Safety Code, which by this reference is made a part hereof.
b. Direct service contract means a contract or agreement for services contained in
local assistance or subvention programs or both (see Health and Safety [H&S]
Code Section 38020). Direct service contracts do not include contracts,
agreements, grants, or subventions to other governmental agencies or units of
government nor contracts or agreements with regional centers or area agencies
on aging (H&S Code Section 38030).
c. The Contractor, as indicated below, agrees to obtain one of the following audits:
(1) If the Contractor is a nonprofit organization (as defined in H&S Code
Section 38040) and receives $25,000 or more from any State agency under
a direct service contract or agreement; the Contractor agrees to obtain an
annual single, organization wide, financial and compliance audit. Said audit
be conducted according to Generally Accepted Auditing Standards. This audit
does not fulfill the audit requirements of Paragraph c(3) below. The audit be
completed by the 15th day of the fifth month following the end of the
Contractor’s fiscal year, and/or
(2) I
f the Contractor is a nonprofit organization (as defined in H&S Code
Section 38040) and receives less than $25,000 per year from any State
agency under a direct service contract or agreement, the Contractor agrees to
obtain a biennial single, organization wide financial and compliance audit,
unless there is evidence of fraud or other violation of State law in connection
with this Agreement. This audit does not fulfill the audit requirements of
Paragraph c(3) below. The audit be completed by the 15th day of the fifth
month following the end of the Contractor’s fiscal year, and/or
(3) I
f the Contractor is a State or Local Government entity or Nonprofit
organization and expends $750,000 or more in federal awards, the
Contractor agrees to obtain an annual single, organization wide, financial and
compliance audit according to the requirements specified in 2 C.F.R. 200.501
entitled “Audit Requirements”. An audit conducted pursuant to this provision
will fulfill the audit requirements outlined in Paragraphs c(1) and c(2) above.
The audit be completed by the end of the ninth month following the end of the
audit period. The requirements of this provision apply if:
(a) The Contractor is a recipient expending federal awards received directly
[[page 532]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 532 of 642
from federal awarding agencies, or
(b) The Contractor is a subrecipient expending federal awards received from
a pass-through entity such as the State, County or community based
organization.
(4) If the Contractor submits to DHCS a report of an audit other than a 2 C.F.R.
200.501audit, the Contractor must also submit a certification indicating the
Contractor has not expended $750,000 or more in federal funds for the year
covered by the audit report.
d. Two copies of the audit report be delivered to the DHCS program funding this
Agreement. The audit report must identify the Contractor’s legal name and the
number assigned to this Agreement. The audit report be due within 30 days after
the completion of the audit. Upon receipt of said audit report, the DHCS Program
Contract Manager forward the audit report to DHCS’ Audits and Investigations
Unit if the audit report was submitted under Section 16.c(3), unless the audit
report is from a City, County, or Special District within the State of California
whereby the report will be retained by the funding program.
e. The cost of the audits described herein may be included in the funding for this
Agreement up to the proportionate amount this Agreement represents of the
Contractor's total revenue. The DHCS program funding this Agreement must
provide advance written approval of the specific amount allowed for said audit
expenses.
f. The State or its authorized designee, including the Bureau of State Audits, is
responsible for conducting agreement performance audits which are not financial
and compliance audits. Performance audits are defined by Generally Accepted
Government Auditing Standards.
g. Nothing in this Agreement limits the State’s responsibility or authority to enforce
State law or regulations, procedures, or reporting requirements arising thereto.
h. Nothing in this provision limits the authority of the State to make audits of this
Agreement, provided however, that if independent audits arranged for by the
Contractor meet Generally Accepted Governmental Auditing Standards, the
State rely on those audits and any additional audit work and build upon the work
already done.
i. The State may, at its option, direct its own auditors to perform either of the audits
described above. The Contractor will be given advance written notification, if the
State chooses to exercise its option to perform said audits.
j. The Contractor must include a clause in any agreement the Contractor enters
into with the audit firm doing the single organization wide audit to provide access
by the State or Federal Government to the working papers of the independent
auditor who prepares the single organization wide audit for the Contractor.
k. Federal or State auditors have "expanded scope auditing" authority to conduct
specific program audits during the same period in which a single organization
[[page 533]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 533 of 642
wide audit is being performed, but the audit report has not been issued. The
federal or State auditors review and have access to the current audit work being
conducted and will not apply any testing or review procedures which have not
been satisfied by previous audit work that has been completed.
The term "expanded scope auditing" is applied and defined in the U.S. General
Accounting Office (GAO) issued Standards for Audit of Government
Organizations, Programs, Activities and Functions, better known as the "yellow
book".
18. Human Subjects Use Requirements
(Applicable only to federally funded agreements/grants in which performance,
directly or through a subcontract/subaward, includes any tests or examination of
materials derived from the human body.)
By signing this Agreement, Contractor agrees that if any performance under this
Agreement or any subcontract or subagreement includes any tests or examination of
materials derived from the human body for the purpose of providing information,
diagnosis, prevention, treatment or assessment of disease, impairment, or health of
a human being, all locations at which such examinations are performed meet the
requirements of 42 U.S.C. Section 263a (CLIA) and the regulations thereunder.
19. Novation Requirements
If the Contractor proposes any novation agreement, DHCS act upon the proposal
within 60 days after receipt of the written proposal. DHCS may review and consider
the proposal, consult and negotiate with the Contractor, and accept or reject all or
part of the proposal. Acceptance or rejection of the proposal may be made orally
within the 60-day period and confirmed in writing within five days of said decision.
Upon written acceptance of the proposal, DHCS will initiate an amendment to this
Agreement to formally implement the approved proposal.
20. Debarment and Suspension Certification
(Applicable to all agreements funded in part or whole with federal funds.)
a. By signing this Agreement, the Contractor/Grantee agrees to comply with
applicable federal suspension and debarment regulations including, but not
limited to 2 CFR Part 180, 2 CFR Part 376
b. By signing this Agreement, the Contractor certifies to the best of its knowledge
and belief, that it and its principals:
(1) Are not presently debarred, suspended, proposed for debarment, declared
ineligible, or voluntarily excluded by any federal department or agency;
(2) Have not within a three-year period preceding this
application/proposal/agreement been convicted of or had a civil judgment
rendered against them for commission of fraud or a criminal offense in
connection with obtaining, attempting to obtain, or performing a public
[[page 534]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 534 of 642
(federal, State or local) violation of federal or State antitrust statutes; or
commission of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or
destruction of records, making false statements, tax evasion, receiving stolen
property, making false claims, obstruction of justice, or the commission of any
other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty that
seriously affects its business honesty;
(3) Are not presently indicted for or otherwise criminally or civilly charged by a
governmental entity (federal, State or local) with commission of any of the
offenses enumerated in Paragraph b(2) herein; and
(4) Have not within a three-year period preceding this
application/proposal/agreement had one or more public transactions (federal,
State or local) terminated for cause or default.
(5) Have not, within a three-year period preceding this
application/proposal/agreement, engaged in any of the violations listed under
2 CFR Part 180, Subpart C as supplemented by 2 CFR Part 376.
(6) not knowingly enter into any lower tier covered transaction with a person who
is proposed for debarment under federal regulations (i.e., 48 CFR part 9,
subpart 9.4), debarred, suspended, declared ineligible, or voluntarily excluded
from participation in such transaction, unless authorized by the State.
(7) Will include a clause entitled, "Debarment and Suspension Certification'' that
essentially sets forth the provisions herein, in all lower tier covered
transactions and in all solicitations for lower tier covered transactions.
c. If the Contractor is unable to certify to any of the statements in this certification,
the Contractor submit an explanation to the DHCS Program Contract Manager.
d. The terms and definitions herein have the meanings set out in 2 CFR Part 180 as
supplemented by 2 CFR Part 376.
e. If the Contractor knowingly violates this certification, in addition to other remedies
available to the Federal Government, the DHCS may terminate this Agreement
for cause or default.
21. Smoke-Free Workplace Certification
(Applicable to federally funded agreements/grants and subcontracts/subawards, that
provide health, day care, early childhood development services, education or library
services to children under 18 directly or through local governments.)
a. Public Law 103-227, also known as the Pro-Children Act of 1994 (Act), requires
that smoking not be permitted in any portion of any indoor facility owned or
leased or contracted for by an entity and used routinely or regularly for the
provision of health, day care, early childhood development services, education or
library services to children under the age of 18, if the services are funded by
federal programs either directly or through State or local governments, by federal
grant, contract, loan, or loan guarantee. The law also applies to children's
[[page 535]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 535 of 642
services that are provided in indoor facilities that are constructed, operated, or
maintained with such federal funds. The law does not apply to children's services
provided in private residences; portions of facilities used for inpatient drug or
alcohol treatment; service providers whose sole source of applicable federal
funds is Medicare or Medicaid; or facilities where WIC coupons are redeemed.
b. Failure to comply with the provisions of the law may result in the imposition of a
civil monetary penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation and/or the imposition of
an administrative compliance order on the responsible party.
c. By signing this Agreement, Contractor or Grantee certifies that it will comply with
the requirements of the Act and will not allow smoking within any portion of any
indoor facility used for the provision of services for children as defined by the Act.
The prohibitions herein are effective December 26, 1994.
d. Contractor or Grantee further agrees that it will insert this certification into any
subawards (subcontracts or subgrants) entered into that provide for children's
services as described in the Act.
22. Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988
The
Federal government implemented the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988 in an
attempt to address the problems of drug abuse on the job. It is a fact that
employees who use drugs have less productivity, a lower quality of work, and a
higher absenteeism, and are more likely to misappropriate funds or services. From
this perspective, the drug abuser may endanger other employees, the public at
large, or themselves. Damage to property, whether owned by this entity or not,
could result from drug abuse on the job. All these actions might undermine public
confidence in the services this entity provides. Therefore, in order to remain a
responsible source for government contracts, the following guidelines have been
adopted:
a. The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of a
controlled substance is prohibited in the work place.
b. Violators may be terminated or requested to seek counseling from an approved
rehabilitation service.
c. Employees must notify their employer of any conviction of a criminal drug statue
no later than five days after such conviction.
d. Although alcohol is not a controlled substance, it is nonetheless a drug. It is the
policy that abuse of this drug will also not be tolerated in the workplace.
e. Contractors of federal agencies are required to certify that they will provide drug-
free workplaces for their employees.
23. Covenant Against Contingent Fees
(Applicable only to federally funded agreements.)
[[page 536]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 536 of 642
The Contractor warrants that no person or selling agency has been employed or
retained to solicit/secure this Agreement upon an agreement of understanding for a
commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee, except bona fide employees
or bona fide established commercial or selling agencies retained by the Contractor
for the purpose of securing business. For breach or violation of this warranty, DHCS
have the right to annul this Agreement without liability or in its discretion to deduct
from the Agreement price or consideration, or otherwise recover, the full amount of
such commission, percentage, and brokerage or contingent fee.
24. Payment Withholds
(Applicable only if a final report is required by this Agreement. Not applicable to
government entities.)
Unless waived or otherwise stipulated in this Agreement, DHCS may, at its
discretion, withhold 10 percent (10%) of the face amount of the Agreement, 50
percent (50%) of the final invoice, or $3,000 whichever is greater, until DHCS
receives a final report that meets the terms, conditions and/or scope of work
requirements of this Agreement.
25. Performance Evaluation
(Not applicable to grant agreements.)
DHCS may, at its discretion, evaluate the performance of the Contractor at the
conclusion of this Agreement. If performance is evaluated, the evaluation not be a
public record and remain on file with DHCS. Negative performance evaluations may
be considered by DHCS prior to making future contract awards.
26. Officials Not to Benefit
No members of or delegate of Congress or the State Legislature shall be admitted to
any share or part of this Agreement, or to any benefit that may arise therefrom. This
provision shall not be construed to extend to this Agreement if made with a
corporation for its general benefits.
27. Four-Digit Date Compliance
(Applicable to agreements in which Information Technology (IT) services are
provided to DHCS or if IT equipment is procured.)
Contractor warrants that it will provide only Four-Digit Date Compliant (as defined
below) Deliverables and/or services to the State. “Four Digit Date compliant”
Deliverables and services can accurately process, calculate, compare, and
sequence date data, including without limitation date data arising out of or relating to
leap years and changes in centuries. This warranty and representation is subject to
the warranty terms and conditions of this Contract and does not limit the generality
of warranty obligations set forth elsewhere herein.
[[page 537]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 537 of 642
28. Prohibited Use of State Funds for Software
(Applicable to agreements in which computer software is used in performance of the
work.)
Contractor certifies that it has appropriate systems and controls in place to ensure
that State funds will not be used in the performance of this Agreement for the
acquisition, operation or maintenance of computer software in violation of copyright
laws.
29. Use of Disabled Veteran’s Business Enterprises (DVBE)
(Applicable to agreements over $10,000 in which the Contractor committed to
achieve DVBE participation. Not applicable to agreements and amendments
specifically exempted from DVBE requirements by DHCS.)
a. The State Legislature has declared that a fair portion of the total purchases and
contracts or subcontracts for property and services for the State be placed with
disabled veteran business enterprises.
b. All DVBE participation attachments, however labeled, completed as a condition
of bidding, contracting, or amending a subject agreement, are incorporated
herein and made a part of this Agreement by this reference.
c. Contractor agrees to use the proposed DVBEs, as identified in previously
submitted DVBE participation attachments. Contractor understands and agrees
to comply with the requirements set forth in Military and Veterans Code Section
999 et seq. in that should award of this contract be based on part on its
commitment to use the DVBE subcontractor(s) identified in its bid or offer, per
Military and Veterans Code section 999.5(g), a DVBE subcontractor may only be
replaced by another DVBE subcontractor and must be approved by both DHCS
and the Department of General Services (DGS) prior to the commencement of
any work by the proposed subcontractor. Changes to the scope of work that
impact the DVBE subcontractor(s) identified in the bid or offer and approved
DVBE substitutions will be documented by contract amendment.
d. Requests for DVBE subcontractor substitution must include:
(1) A written explanation of the reason for the DVBE substitution.
(2) A written description of the business enterprise that will be substituted,
including its DVBE certification status.
(3) A written description of the work to be performed by the substituted DVBE
subcontractor and an identification of the percentage share/dollar amount
of the overall contract that the substituted subcontractor will perform.
e. Failure of the Contractor to seek substitution and adhere to the DVBE
participation level identified in the bid or offer may be cause for contract
termination, recovery of damages under rights and remedies due to the State,
and penalties as outlined in Military and Veterans Code § 999.9; Public Contract
Code (PCC) §10115.10, or PCC §4110 (applies to public works only).
[[page 538]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 538 of 642
f. Upon completion of this Contract, DHCS requires the Contractor to certify using
the Prime Contractor’s Certification – DVBE Subcontracting Report (STD 817), al
of the following: .
(1) The total amount the prime contractor received under the agreement;
(2) The name, address, Contract number and certification ID Number of the
DVBE(s) that participated in the performance of this Contract;
(3) The amount and percentage of work the prime Contractor committed to
provide to one or more DVBE(s) under the requirements of the Contract and
the total payment each DVBE received from the prime Contractor;;
(4) That all payments under the Contract have been made to the DVBE(s); and
(5) The actual percentage of DVBE participation that was achieved. Upon
request, the prime Contractor must provide proof of payment for the work.
g. If for this Contract the Contractor made a commitment to achieve the DVBE
participation goal, DHCS will withhold $10,000 from the final payment, or the full
payment if less than $10,000, until the Contractor complies with the certification
requirements above. A Contractor that fails to comply with the certification
requirement must, after written notice, be allowed to cure the defect.
Notwithstanding any other law, if, after at least 15 calendar days but not more
than 30 calendar days from the date of written notice, the prime Contractor
refuses to comply with the certification requirements, DHCS will permanently
deduct $10,000 from the final payment, or the full payment if less than $10,000.
(Mil. & Vet. Code § 999.7.)
h. A person or entity that knowingly provides false information will be subject to a
civil penalty for each violation. (Mil. & Vet. Code § 999.5(d); Govt. Code §
14841.)
i. Contractor agrees to comply with the rules, regulations, ordinances, and statutes
that apply to the DVBE program as defined in Section 999 of the Military &
Veterans Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements of Section
999.5(d). (PCC§ 10230.)
30. Use of Small, Minority Owned and Women's Businesses
(Applicable to that portion of an agreement that is federally funded and entered into
with institutions of higher education, hospitals, nonprofit organizations or commercial
businesses.)
Positive efforts be made to use small businesses, minority-owned firms and
women's business enterprises, whenever possible (i.e., procurement of goods
and/or services). Contractors take all of the following steps to further this goal.
a. Ensure that small businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's business
enterprises are used to the fullest extent practicable.
[[page 539]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 539 of 642
b. Make information on forthcoming purchasing and contracting opportunities
available and arrange time frames for purchases and contracts to encourage and
facilitate participation by small businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's
business enterprises.
c. Consider in the contract process whether firms competing for larger contracts
intend to subcontract with small businesses, minority-owned firms, and women's
business enterprises.
d. Encourage contracting with consortiums of small businesses, minority-owned
firms and women's business enterprises when a contract is too large for one of
these firms to handle individually.
e. Use the services and assistance, as appropriate, of such organizations as the
Federal Small Business Administration and the U.S. Department of Commerce's
Minority Business Development Agency in the solicitation and utilization of small
businesses, minority-owned firms and women's business enterprises.
31. Alien Ineligibility Certification
(Applicable to sole proprietors entering federally funded agreements.)
By signing this Agreement, the Contractor certifies that he/she is not an alien that is
ineligible for State and local benefits, as defined in Subtitle B of the Personal
Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act. (8 U.S.C. 1601, et seq.)
32. Union Organizing
(Applicable only to grant agreements.)
Grantee, by signing this Agreement, hereby acknowledges the applicability of
Government Code Sections 16645 through 16649 to this Agreement. Furthermore,
Grantee, by signing this Agreement, hereby certifies that:
a. No State funds disbursed by this grant will be used to assist, promote or deter
union organizing.
b. Grantee account for State funds disbursed for a specific expenditure by this
grant, to show those funds were allocated to that expenditure.
c. Grantee, where State funds are not designated as described in b herein, allocate,
on a pro-rata basis, all disbursements that support the grant program.
d. If Grantee makes expenditures to assist, promote or deter union organizing,
Grantee will maintain records sufficient to show that no State funds were used for
those expenditures, and that Grantee provide those records to the Attorney
General upon request.
33. Contract Uniformity (Fringe Benefit Allowability)
(Applicable only to nonprofit organizations.)
[[page 540]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 540 of 642
Pursuant to the provisions of Article 7 (commencing with Section 100525) of Chapter
3 of Part 1 of Division 101 of the Health and Safety Code, DHCS sets forth the
following policies, procedures, and guidelines regarding the reimbursement of fringe
benefits.
a. As used herein fringe benefits shall mean an employment benefit given by one’s
employer to an employee in addition to one’s regular or normal wages or salary.
b. As used herein, fringe benefits do not include:
(1) Compensation for personal services paid currently or accrued by the
Contractor for services of employees rendered during the term of this
Agreement, which is identified as regular or normal salaries and wages,
annual leave, vacation, sick leave, holidays, jury duty and/or military
leave/training.
(2) Director’s and executive committee member’s fees.
(3) Incentive awards and/or bonus incentive pay.
(4) Allowances for off-site pay.
(5) Location allowances.
(6) Hardship pay.
(7) Cost-of-living differentials
c. Specific allowable fringe benefits include:
(1) Fringe benefits in the form of employer contributions for the employer's
portion of payroll taxes (i.e., FICA, SUI, SDI), employee health plans (i.e.,
health, dental and vision), unemployment insurance, worker’s compensation
insurance, and the employer’s share of pension/retirement plans, provided
they are granted in accordance with established written organization policies
and meet all legal and Internal Revenue Service requirements.
d. To be an allowable fringe benefit, the cost must meet the following criteria:
(1) Be necessary and reasonable for the performance of the Agreement.
(2) Be determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
(3) Be consistent with policies that apply uniformly to all activities of the
Contractor.
e. Contractor agrees that all fringe benefits be at actual cost.
f. Earned/Accrued Compensation
(1) Compensation for vacation, sick leave and holidays is limited to that amount
earned/accrued within the agreement term. Unused vacation, sick leave and
[[page 541]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 541 of 642
holidays earned from periods prior to the agreement term cannot be claimed
as allowable costs. See Provision f (3)(a) for an example.
(2) For multiple year agreements, vacation and sick leave compensation, which
is earned/accrued but not paid, due to employee(s) not taking time off may be
carried over and claimed within the overall term of the multiple years of the
Agreement. Holidays cannot be carried over from one agreement year to the
next. See Provision f (3)(b) for an example.
(3) For single year agreements, vacation, sick leave and holiday compensation
that is earned/accrued but not paid, due to employee(s) not taking time off
within the term of the Agreement, cannot be claimed as an allowable cost.
See Provision f (3)(c) for an example.
(a) Example No. 1:
If an employee, John Doe, earns/accrues three weeks of vacation and
twelve days of sick leave each year, then that is the maximum amount that
may be claimed during a one year agreement. If John Doe has five weeks
of vacation and eighteen days of sick leave at the beginning of an
agreement, the Contractor during a one-year budget period may only
claim up to three weeks of vacation and twelve days of sick leave as
actually used by the employee. Amounts earned/accrued in periods prior
to the beginning of the Agreement are not an allowable cost.
(b) Example No. 2:
If during a three-year (multiple year) agreement, John Doe does not use
his three weeks of vacation in year one, or his three weeks in year two,
but he does actually use nine weeks in year three; the Contractor would
be allowed to claim all nine weeks paid for in year three. The total
compensation over the three-year period cannot exceed 156 weeks (3 x
52 weeks).
(c) Example No. 3:
If during a single year agreement, John Doe works fifty weeks and used
one week of vacation and one week of sick leave and all fifty-two weeks
have been billed to DHCS, the remaining unused two weeks of vacation
and seven days of sick leave may not be claimed as an allowable cost.
34. Suspension or Stop Work Notification
a. DHCS may, at any time, issue a notice to suspend performance or stop work
under this Agreement. The initial notification may be a verbal or written directive
issued by the funding Program’s Contract Manager. Upon receipt of said notice,
the Contractor is to suspend and/or stop all, or any part, of the work called for by
this Agreement.
b. Written confirmation of the suspension or stop work notification with directions as
to what work (if not all) is to be suspended and how to proceed will be provided
[[page 542]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 542 of 642
within 30 Working Days of the verbal notification. The suspension or stop work
notification remain in effect until further written notice is received from DHCS.
The resumption of work (in whole or part) will be at DHCS’ discretion and upon
receipt of written confirmation.
(1) Upon receipt of a suspension or stop work notification, the Contractor
immediately comply with its terms and take all reasonable steps to minimize
or halt the incurrence of costs allocable to the performance covered by the
notification during the period of work suspension or stoppage.
(2) Within 90 days of the issuance of a suspension or stop work notification,
DHCS either:
(a) Cancel, extend, or modify the suspension or stop work notification; or
(b) Terminate the Agreement as provided for in the Cancellation / Termination
clause of the Agreement.
c. If a suspension or stop work notification issued under this clause is canceled or
the period of suspension or any extension thereof is modified or expires, the
Contractor may resume work only upon written concurrence of funding Program’s
Contract Manager.
d. If the suspension or stop work notification is cancelled and the Agreement
resumes, changes to the services, deliverables, performance dates, and/or
contract terms resulting from the suspension or stop work notification shall
require an amendment to the Agreement.
e. If a suspension or stop work notification is not canceled and the Agreement is
cancelled or terminated pursuant to the provision entitled Cancellation /
Termination, DHCS allow reasonable costs resulting from the suspension or stop
work notification in arriving at the settlement costs.
f. DHCS shall not be liable to the Contractor for loss of profits because of any
suspension or stop work notification issued under this clause.
35. Public Communications
“Electronic and printed documents developed and produced, for public
communications follow the following requirements to comply with Section 508 of the
Rehabilitation Act and the American with Disabilities Act:
a. Ensure visual-impaired, hearing-impaired and other special needs audiences are
provided material information in formats that provide the most assistance in
making informed choices.”
36. Compliance with Statutes and Regulations
a. The Contractor must comply with all California and federal law, regulations, and
published guidelines, to the extent that these authorities contain requirements
applicable to Contractor's performance under the Agreement.
[[page 543]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 543 of 642
b. These authorities include, but are not limited to, Title 2, Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) Part 200, subpart F, Appendix II; Title 42 CFR Part 431,
subpart F; Title 42 CFR Part 433, subpart D; Title 42 CFR Part 434; Title 45 CFR
Part 75, subpart D; and Title 45 CFR Part 95, subpart F. To the extent applicable
under federal law, this Agreement incorporate the contractual provisions in these
federal regulations and they supersede any conflicting provisions in this
Agreement.
37. Lobbying Restrictions and Disclosure Certification
(Applicable to federally funded agreements in excess of $100,000 per Section 1352
of the 31, U.S.C.)
a. Certification and Disclosure Requirements
(1) Each person (or recipient) who requests or receives a contract or agreement,
subcontract, grant, or subgrant, which is subject to Section 1352 of the 31,
U.S.C., and which exceeds $100,000 at any tier, file a certification (in the form
set forth in Attachment 1, consisting of one page, entitled “Certification
Regarding Lobbying”) that the recipient has not made, and will not make, any
payment prohibited by Paragraph b of this provision.
(2) Each recipient file a disclosure (in the form set forth in Attachment 2, entitled
“Standard Form-LLL ‘disclosure of Lobbying Activities’”) if such recipient has
made or has agreed to make any payment using nonappropriated funds (to
include profits from any covered federal action) in connection with a contract,
or grant or any extension or amendment of that contract, or grant, which
would be prohibited under Paragraph b of this provision if paid for with
appropriated funds.
(3) Each recipient file a disclosure form at the end of each calendar quarter in
which there occurs any event that requires disclosure or that materially affect
the accuracy of the information contained in any disclosure form previously
filed by such person under Paragraph a(2) herein. An event that materially
affects the accuracy of the information reported includes:
(a) A cumulative increase of $25,000 or more in the amount paid or expected
to be paid for influencing or attempting to influence a covered federal
action;
(b) A change in the person(s) or individuals(s) influencing or attempting to
influence a covered federal action; or
(c) A change in the officer(s), employee(s), or member(s) contacted for the
purpose of influencing or attempting to influence a covered federal action.
(4) Each person (or recipient) who requests or receives from a person referred to
in Paragraph a(1) of this provision a contract or agreement, subcontract, grant
or subgrant exceeding $100,000 at any tier under a contract or agreement, or
grant file a certification, and a disclosure form, if required, to the next tier
above.
[[page 544]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 544 of 642
(5) All disclosure forms (but not certifications) be forwarded from tier to tier until
received by the person referred to in Paragraph a(1) of this provision. That
person forward all disclosure forms to DHCS Program Contract Manager.
b. Prohibition
Section 1352 of Title 31, U.S.C., provides in part that no appropriated funds may
be expended by the recipient of a federal contract or agreement, grant, loan, or
cooperative agreement to pay any person for influencing or attempting to
influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of Congress, an
officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in
connection with any of the following covered federal actions: the awarding of any
federal contract or agreement, the making of any federal grant, the making of any
federal loan, entering into of any cooperative agreement, and the extension,
continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of any federal contract or
agreement, grant, loan, or cooperative agreement.
[[page 545]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 545 of 642
Attachment 1
CERTIFICATION REGARDING LOBBYING
The undersigned certifies, to the best of his or her knowledge and belief, that:
1. No federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid, by or on behalf of the
undersigned, to any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or
employee of an agency, a Member of Congress, an officer or employee of Congress,
or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with the making, awarding or
entering into of this federal contract, federal grant, or cooperative agreement, and the
extension, continuation, renewal, amendment, or modification of this federal contract,
grant, or cooperative agreement.
2. If any funds other than federal appropriated funds have been paid or will be paid to
any person for influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any
agency of the United States Government, a Member of Congress, an officer or
employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress in connection with
this federal contract, grant, or cooperative agreement, the undersigned complete and
submit Standard Form LLL, “Disclosure of Lobbying Activities'' in accordance with its
instructions.
3. The undersigned require that the language of this certification be included in the award
documents for all subawards at all tiers (including subcontractors, subgrants, and
contracts under grants and cooperative agreements) of $100,000 or more, and that
all subrecipients certify and disclose accordingly.
This certification is a material representation of fact upon which reliance was placed when this transaction
was made or entered into. Submission of this certification is a prerequisite for making or entering into this
transaction imposed by Section 1352, Title 31, U.S.C., any person who fails to file the required certification
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $10,000 and not more than $100,000 for each such failure.
Name of Contractor Printed Name of Person Signing for Contractor
Contract / Grant Number Signature of Person Signing for Contractor
Date Title
[[page 546]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 546 of 642
After execution by or on behalf of Contractor, please return to:
California Department of Health Care Services
DHCS reserves the right to notifiy the contractor in writing of an alternate submission
address.
[[page 547]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 547 of 642
Attachment 2
CERTIFICATION REGARDING LOBBYING
Approved by OMB (0348-0046)
Complete this form to disclose lobbying activities pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1352
(See reverse for public burden disclosure)
1. Type of Federal Action: 2. Status of Federal
Action:
3. Report Type:
_ a. contract
b. grant
c. cooperative
agreement
d. loan
e. loan guarantee
f. loan insurance
_ a. bid/offer/application
b. initial award
c. post-award
_ a. initial filing
b. material change
For Material Change
Only:
Year quarter
date of last
report .
4. Name and Address of Reporting
Entity:
5. If Reporting Entity in No. 4 is
Subawardee,
Enter Name and Address of Prime:
☐Prime ☐Subawardee
Tier , if
known:
Congressional District, If known:
Congressional District, If known:
6. Federal Department/Agency 7. Federal Program Name/Description:
CDFA Number, if applicable:
8. Federal Action Number, if known: 9. Award Amount, if known:
10.a. Name and Address of Lobbying
Registrant
(If individual, last name, first name,
MI):
b. Individuals Performing Services
(including address if different
from 10a.
(Last name, First name, MI):
[[page 548]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 548 of 642
11. Information requested through this form is authorized by title 31 U.S.C. section
1352. This disclosure of lobbying activities is a material representation of fact upon
which reliance was placed by the tier above when this transaction was made or
entered into. This disclosure is required pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 1352. This
information will be available for public inspection. Any person that fails to file the
required disclosure shall be subject to a not more than $100,000 for each such
failure.
Signature:
Print Name:
Title:
Telephone
Number:
Date:
Federal Use Only Authorized for Local Reproduction
Standard Form-LLL (Rev. 7-97)
[[page 549]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 549 of 642
INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETION OF SF-LLL, DISCLOSURE OF LOBBYING
ACTIVITIES
This disclosure form be completed by the reporting entity, whether subawardee or prime
federal recipient, at the initiation or receipt of a covered federal action, or a material
change to a previous filing, pursuant to title 31 U.S.C. section 1352. The filing of a form
is required for each payment or agreement to make payment to any lobbying entity for
influencing or attempting to influence an officer or employee of any agency, a Member of
Congress, an officer or employee of Congress, or an employee of a Member of Congress
in connection with a covered f ederal action. Complete all items that apply for both the
initial filing and material change report. Refer to the implementing guidance published by
the Office of Management and Budget for additional information.
1. Identify the type of covered f ederal action for which lobbying activity is and/or has
been secured to influence the outcome of a covered federal action.
2. Identify the status of the covered federal action.
3. Identify the appropriate classification of this report. If this is a followup report caused
by a material change to the information previously reported, enter the year and quarter
in which the change occurred. Enter the date of the last previously submitted report
by this reporting entity for this covered federal action.
4. Enter the full name, address, city, state and zip code of the reporting entity. Include
Congressional District, if known. Check the appropriate classification of the reporting
entity that designates if itis, or expects to be,a prime or subaward recipient. Identify
the tier of the subawardee, e.g., the first subawardee of the prime is the 1st tier.
Subawards include but are not limited to subcontracts, subgrants and contract awards
under grants.
5. If the organization filing the report in item 4 checks "Subawardee," then enter the full
name, address, city, state and zip code of the prime f ederal recipient. Include
Congressional District, if known.
6. Enter the name of the federal agency making the award or loan commitment. Include
at least one organizational level below agency name, if known. For example,
Department of Transportation, United States Coast Guard.
7. Enter the federal program name or description for the covered federal action (item 1).
If known, enter the full Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) number for
grants, cooperative agreements, loans, and loan commitments.
8. Enter the most appropriate federal identifying number available for the f ederal action
identified in item 1 (e.g., Request for Proposal (RFP) number; Invitation for Bid (IFB)
number; grant announcement number; the contract, grant, or loan award number; the
[[page 550]]
Exhibit D(f)
Page 550 of 642
application/proposal control number assigned by the Federal agency). Include
prefixes, e.g., "RFP-DE-90-001”.
9. For a covered Federal action where there has been an award or loan commitment by
the Federal agency, enter the Federal amount of the award/loan commitment for the
prime entity identified in item 4 or 5.
10. (a) Enter the full name, address, city, state and zip code of the lobbying registrant
under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 engaged by the reporting entity identified
in item 4 to influence the covered Federal action.
(b) Enter the full names of the individual(s) performing services, and include full
address if different from 10 (a). Enter Last Name, First Name, and Middle Initial (MI).
11. The certifying official sign and date the form, print his/her name, title, and telephone
number.
According to the Paperwork Reduction Act, as amended, no persons are required to
respond to a collection of information unless it displays a valid OMB Control Number.
The valid OMB control number for this information collection is OMB No. 0348- 0046.
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 10
minutes per response, including time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data
sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the
collection of information. Send comments regarding the burden estimate or any other
aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to
the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0348- 0046),
Washington, DC 20503.
[[page 551]]
Exhibit E
Page 551 of 642
Exhibit E – Program Terms and Conditions
1.0 Program Terms and Conditions
[[page 552]]
Exhibit E
Page 552 of 642
1.1 Program Terms and Conditions
1.1.1 Governing Law
1.1.2 DHCS Guidance
1.1.3 Contract Interpretation
1.1.4 Assignments, Mergers, Acquisitions
1.1.5 Independent Contractor
1.1.6 Amendment and Change Order Process
1.1.7 Delegation of Authority
1.1.8 Authority of the State
1.1.9 Fulfillment of Obligations
1.1.10 Obtaining DHCS Approval
1.1.11 Certifications
1.1.12 Notices
1.1.13 Term
1.1.14 Service Area
1.1.15 Contract Extension
1.1.16 Termination
1.1.17 Phaseout Requirements
1.1.18 Indemnification
1.1.19 Sanctions
1.1.20 Liquidated Damages
1.1.21 Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements
1.1.22 Inspection and Audit of Records and Facilities
1.1.23 Confidentiality of Information
1.1.24 Pilot Projects
1.1.25 Cost Avoidance and Post-Payment Recovery of Other Health Coverage
1.1.26 Third-Party Tort and Workers’ Compensation Liability
1.1.27 Litigation Support
1.1.28 Equal Opportunity Employer
1.1.29 Federal and State Nondiscrimination Requirements
1.1.30 Discrimination Prohibitions
1.1.31 Small Business Participation and Disabled Veteran Business Enterprises
Reporting Requirements
1.1.32 Conflict of Interest Avoidance Requirements
1.1.33 Guaranty Provision
1.1.34 Priority of Provisions
1.1.35 Additional Incorporated Provisions – Narrative Proposals
1.1.36 Miscellaneous Provisions
1.1.37 Data Sharing
[[page 553]]
Exhibit E
Page 553 of 642
Exhibit E - Program Terms and Conditions
1.1.1
Governing Law
A. Contractor must comply with all applicable federal and State law.
B. All Contract disputes and determinations must be decided under California
law.
C. The venue and forum for any action involving a Contract dispute will be in
the Superior Court for the State of California, County of Sacramento.
D. Applicability of the Knox-Keene Act
1) A Contractor who is licensed as a health care service plan pursuant
to the Knox-Keene Health Care Service Plan Act of 1975 (KKA)
(and its implementing regulations (28 California Code of
Regulations (CCR) section 1000, et seq.) must comply with all
applicable provisions of the KKA.
2) A Contractor who is not licensed to operate as a health care service
plan pursuant to the KKA must perform all acts and satisfy all
requirements under the KKA to the same extent as Contractors
who are licensed pursuant to the KKA, except as otherwise
expressly provided in this Contract. A Contractor who is not
licensed to operate as a health care service plan under the KKA is
not required by this Contract to perform or satisfy the following:
a) Any provision of the KKA which requires the submission of a
report of any kind to the Department of Managed Health
Care (DMHC) or obliges a health care service plan to seek
approval from DMHC, including, but not limited to, the
Independent Medical Review processes set out in section
1370.4 and Article 5.55 of the KKA;
b) Any provision under Article 3 of the KKA related to licensure;
and
c) The provisions set forth in Exhibit K of this Contract. Exhibit
K is not an exhaustive or exclusive list, and other provisions
of the KKA may also be excluded from the Contract pursuant
to this Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.1 (Governing Law) or other
provisions of this Contract.
3) Both KKA-licensed Contractors and non-KKA-licensed Contractors
are subject to the following provisions:
[[page 554]]
Exhibit E
Page 554 of 642
a) Nothing in this Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.1 (Governing Law)
is intended to relieve Contractor of any other duties or
requirements that would otherwise apply; and
b) In the event that a provision of this Contract sets a standard
or requirement that is higher, or affords a greater benefit or
right to a Member than that which the KKA provides, the
Contract provisions prevail.
1.1.2 DHCS Guidance
Contractor must comply with all DHCS guidance, including but not limited to All
Plan Letters (APLs), PLs, the California Medicaid State Plan, and the Medi-Cal
Provider Manual.
A. APLs and PLs
Contractor must comply with all existing and future APLs and PLs as
follows:
1) APLs and PLs existing on the effective date of the Contract will be
considered part of the Contract as if fully set forth herein;
2) APLs and PLs issued or revised subsequent to the effective date of
the Contract can provide clarification of existing contractual
obligations;
3) APLs and PLs issued or revised subsequent to the effective date of
the Contract can provide instructions regarding implementation of
mandated obligations, including but not limited to implementation of
changes in State or federal statutes or regulations, or pursuant to
judicial interpretation; and
4) APLs and PLs issued by DHCS pursuant to statutory authority to
issue guidance in lieu of regulations will have the same force and
effect as regulations and may set forth new obligations.
5) APLs and PLs cited and incorporated by reference into the Contract
also include any subsequent revisions to the APL or PL.
B. California Medicaid State Plan
[[page 555]]
Exhibit E
Page 555 of 642
Unless otherwise specified in this Contract, Contractor will comply with all
applicable provisions of the California Medicaid State Plan, as amended.
In the event there is a conflict between the California Medicaid State Plan
and this Contract, the California Medicaid State Plan will control. The
California Medicaid State Plan and any amendments thereto, can be
viewed at the California’s Medicaid State Plan (Title XIX) web page.
C. Medi-Cal Provider Manual
Unless otherwise specified in this Contract, Contractor must comply with
all current and applicable provisions of the Medi-Cal Provider Manual. In
the event that the Medi-Cal Provider Manual conflicts with this Contract,
APLs and PLs, and/or any applicable federal or State laws, the Contract,
the APL or PL, or the applicable law will control. The Medi-Cal Provider
Manual can be viewed online.
1.1.3 Contract Interpretation
A. Conflict with Law
Any provision of this Contract that is in conflict with current or future
applicable federal or State laws or regulations is hereby amended to
conform to the provisions of those laws and regulations. Such amendment
of the Contract will be effective on the effective date of the statutes or
regulations necessitating it and will be binding on Contractor even though
such amendment may not yet have been put in writing, formally agreed
upon, and executed by Contractor and DHCS.
If changes in federal or State law result in a material change to the
Contract, the amendment may constitute grounds for termination of this
Contract in accordance with Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.16 (Termination).
The parties will be bound by the terms of the amendment until the
effective date of the termination.
B. Word Usage
Unless the context of this Contract clearly requires otherwise, (a) the
plural and singular numbers will each be deemed to include the other; (b)
the masculine, feminine, and neuter genders will each be deemed to
include the others; (c) "shall," "will," "must," or "agrees" are mandatory,
and "may" is permissive; (d) "or" is not exclusive; and (e) "includes" and
"including" are not limiting.
C. Ambiguities
[[page 556]]
Exhibit E
Page 556 of 642
If it is necessary to interpret the text of this Contract to address potential
ambiguities, all applicable laws may be used as aids in interpreting the
Contract. However, DHCS and Contractor agree that any such applicable
laws will not be interpreted to create additional contractual obligations
upon either DHCS or Contractor, unless such applicable laws are
expressly incorporated into this Contract in some section other than this
Section. This Contract is the product of mutual negotiation, and if any
ambiguities should arise in the interpretation of this Contract, both parties
will be deemed authors of this Contract.
D. Unenforceable Provisions
In the event that any provision of this Contract is unenforceable or held to
be unenforceable, then DHCS and Contractor agree that all other
provisions of this Contract have force and effect and will not be affected
thereby.
E. Timeliness
Time is of the essence in this Contract.
F. Entire Agreement
This written Contract, any amendments thereto, and DHCS guidance as
identified in Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.2 (DHCS Guidance), will constitute
the entire agreement between the parties. No oral representations will be
binding on either party unless such representations are put in writing and
made an amendment to this Contract.
1.1.4 Assignments, Mergers, Acquisitions
Contractor is prohibited from assigning this Contract, either in whole or in part,
without the express written consent of DHCS in the form of a formal written
amendment signed by DHCS, Contractor, and the third-party assignee (See also,
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.2 (DHCS Approval of Network Provider
Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements). Contractor must also obtain the express written consent of DHCS
prior to entering into a merger or acquisition, whether or not Contractor is the
merging party or the acquiring party.
1.1.5 Independent Contractor
Contractor and their employees and agents, in the performance of this Contract,
will act in an independent capacity and not as officers or employees or agents of
DHCS.
[[page 557]]
Exhibit E
Page 557 of 642
1.1.6 Amendment and Change Order Process
A. General Provisions
The parties recognize that during the term of this Contract, the Medi-Cal
managed care program is a dynamic program requiring ongoing changes
to its operations and that the scope and complexity of changes will vary
widely over the term of this Contract. Contractor must develop a system
which has the capability to implement such changes in an orderly and
timely manner. This is an essential contract performance obligation.
B. Proposal of Contract Changes
Except for required amendments pursuant to Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.3.A
(Contract Interpretation) should either party, during the life of this Contract,
desire a change in this Contract, that change must be proposed in writing
to the other party. The other party must acknowledge receipt of the
proposal within ten calendar days of receipt of the proposal. The party
proposing any such change will have the right to withdraw the proposal
any time prior to acceptance or rejection by the other party. Any proposal
must set forth an explanation of the reason and basis for the proposed
change and the text of the desired amendment to this Contract.
1) Regardless of the party desiring the change, DHCS will be
responsible for drafting the proposed amendment and providing it
to Contractor for review and comment prior to the language being
finalized and submitted to CMS for approval.
2) DHCS will determine Contractor’s Capitation Payment rates for
each Rating Period and, as necessary, subsequent revised rates
for the same Rating Period, as stated in Exhibit B, Subsection 1.1.5
(Determination and Redetermination of Capitation Payment Rates).
C. Implementation of Contract Capitation Payments
DHCS may, at any time within the general scope of this Contract and by
written notice, implement Capitation Payment rates through amendments
to the Contract upon approval from CMS. Capitation Payment rates that
are tied to proposed changes to the terms or requirements of the Contract
effective within the Rating Period will be included in an amendment to the
Contract.
D. Contractor's Obligation to Implement
Notwithstanding approval by CMS of proposed changes to this Contract,
Contractor will comply with changes mandated by DHCS. In the case of
[[page 558]]
Exhibit E
Page 558 of 642
changes mandated by regulations, statutes, federal guidelines, or judicial
interpretation, Contractor must immediately begin implementation of any
change proposed in an amendment to this Contract or through an APL. If
DHCS implements an amendment or APL, Contractor must implement the
required changes and accept current Capitation Payments as stated in
Exhibit B, Section 1.5 (Determination and Redetermination of Capitation
Payment Rates) while discussions relevant to any Capitation Payment
rate adjustment, if applicable, are taking place.
1.1.7 Delegation of Authority
DHCS intends to implement this Contract through a single administrator, called
the "DHCS Contracting Officer." The Director will appoint its DHCS Contracting
Officer. The DHCS Contracting Officer, under the direction of the Director and on
behalf of DHCS, will make all determinations and take all actions as are
appropriate under this Contract, subject to the limitations of applicable federal
and State laws and regulations. The DHCS Contracting Officer may delegate
their authority to act to an authorized representative through written notice to
Contractor.
Contractor will designate a single administrator (Contractor's Representative) to
implement this Contract. Contractor's Representative, on behalf of Contractor,
will make all determinations and take all actions as are appropriate to implement
this Contract, subject to the limitations of the Contract, federal and State laws
and regulations. Contractor's Representative may delegate their authority to act
to an AR through written notice to the DHCS Contracting Officer. Contractor's
Representative will be empowered to legally bind Contractor to all agreements
reached with DHCS.
Contractor will designate Contractor’s Representative in writing and must notify
the DHCS Contracting Officer in accordance with Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.12
(Notices).
1.1.8 Authority of the State
A. Subject to federal and State laws and regulations, DHCS has sole
authority to establish, define, and determine the reasonableness,
necessity, level, and scope of Covered Services available under the Medi-
Cal managed care program administered through this Contract or
coverage for such benefits, or the eligibility of Members or Providers to
participate in the Medi-Cal managed care program.
B. DHCS has sole authority to establish or interpret policy and its application
related to administration of the Medi-Cal program.
[[page 559]]
Exhibit E
Page 559 of 642
C. Contractor must not make any limitations, exclusions, or changes in
benefits or benefit coverage; any changes in definition or interpretation of
benefits; or any changes in the administration of the Contract related to
the scope of benefits, allowable coverage for those benefits; or eligibility of
Members or Providers to participate in the program, without the express,
written direction or approval of the DHCS Contracting Officer.
1.1.9 Fulfillment of Obligations
Contractor must not waive any covenant, condition, duty, obligation, or
undertaking contained in or made a part of this Contract except by written
agreement of the parties. Forbearance or indulgence in any other form or manner
by either party in any regard whatsoever will not constitute a waiver of the
covenant, condition, duty, obligation, or undertaking to be kept, performed or
discharged by the party to which the same may apply. Until performance or
satisfaction of all covenants, conditions, duties, obligations, and undertakings is
complete, the other party will have the right to invoke any remedy available under
this Contract, or under law, notwithstanding such forbearance or indulgence.
1.1.10 Obtaining DHCS Approval
A. DHCS Approval of Deliverables Prior to Commencement of Operations
Prior to commencement of operations, Contractor must obtain written
approval from DHCS for all deliverables, including but not limited to
protocols, policies, and procedures, set forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III,
Article 7.0 (Operations Deliverables and Requirements).
B. DHCS Approval of Protocols, Policies, and Procedures
In addition to the deliverables identified in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Article
7.0 (Operations Deliverables and Requirements) of this Contract, DHCS
reserves the right to review and approve or disapprove Contractor’s
protocols, policies, and procedures. DHCS may, from time to time, request
changes to Contractor’s existing protocols, policies, and procedures.
DHCS will issue such requests through APLs or other similar instructions.
The deliverables, protocols, policies, and procedures referenced in this
Exhibit E, Subsections 1.1.10.A and B (Obtaining DHCS Approval), will be
subject to the DHCS approval process set forth in Exhibit E, Subsection
1.1.10.C (Obtaining DHCS Approval), below.
C. DHCS Approval Process
Within 60 calendar days of receipt, DHCS will make all reasonable efforts
to approve in writing Contractor’s deliverables, protocols, policies, and
procedures; provide Contractor with a written explanation of disapproval;
[[page 560]]
Exhibit E
Page 560 of 642
or provide a written estimated date of completion of DHCS’ review
process.
If DHCS does not complete its review of submitted materials within 60
calendar days of receipt, or within the estimated date of completion of
DHCS review, Contractor may elect to implement or use the materials at
Contractor’s sole risk and subject to possible subsequent disapproval by
DHCS. This Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.10.C (Obtaining DHCS Approval)
will not be construed to imply DHCS approval of any materials that have
not received written DHCS approval. This Section will not apply to
Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, or
Network Provider Agreements subject to DHCS approval in accordance
with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.2 (DHCS Approval of
Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements).
1.1.11 Certifications
A. For each data submission required by 42 Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) section 438.604, Contractor must comply with the requirements of
42 CFR section 438.606 and APL 17-005. Contractor must submit its
certification of compliance concurrently with the submission of its data,
documentation or information pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.606(c).
Contractor’s certification(s) must be certified by Contractor’s Chief
Executive Officer (CEO); Chief Financial Officer (CFO); or an individual
who reports directly to the CEO or CFO with delegated authority to sign for
the CEO or CFO. Contractor’s CEO or CFO is solely responsible for the
truth, accuracy and completeness of Contractor’s certification.
1) Contractor’s data submissions must be in a form and manner
specified by DHCS:
a) Encounter Data as set forth in 42 CFR section
438.604(a)(1); and
b) Data used by the State to certify actuarial soundness of
Capitation Payment rates as set forth in 42 CFR section
438.604(a)(2).
2) Medical Loss Ratio (MLR) data as set forth in 42 CFR section
438.604(a)(3);
3) Financial data regarding provisions against risk of insolvency as set
forth in 42 CFR section 438.604(a)(4);
[[page 561]]
Exhibit E
Page 561 of 642
4) Documentation described in 42 CFR section 438.207(b) used to
certify compliance with this Contract’s requirements for accessibility
and availability of services, including Network adequacy;
5) Contractor’s information on ownership and control, including its
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers, as set forth in 42 CFR sections 438.608(c)(2),
438.602(c), and 455.104;
6) The annual report of overpayment recoveries as required in 42
CFR section 438.608(d)(3);
7) Network Data as required in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection
2.1.4 (Network Provider Data Reporting);
8) Documentation confirming compliance with this Contract’s
interoperability requirements and APL 22-026 that is certified by
Contractor’s CEO or CFO and in accordance with submission
requirements in APL 17-005; and
9) Any other data, documentation, or information requested by DHCS
relating to the performance of Contractor’s obligations under this
Contract.
B. The Contractor Certification Clauses (CCC) contained in the Department
of General Services form document CCC 04/2017 are hereby incorporated
by reference and made a part of this Contract by this reference as if
attached hereto.
1.1.12 Notices
All notices to be given under this Contract must be in writing and are deemed
given when sent certified mailed or electronic mail (email) to DHCS or
Contractor. DHCS and Contractor will designate email addresses for notices sent
via email. Notices sent certified mail must be addressed to the following DHCS
and Contractor addresses:
California Department of Health Care Services [Contractor’s Name]
Managed Care Operations Division
Attn: DHCS Contract Manager Attn: Contractor Representative
MS 4407
P.O. Box 997413 [Mailing Address]
Sacramento, CA 95899-7413 [City, State Zip Code]
1.1.13 Term
[[page 562]]
Exhibit E
Page 562 of 642
A. The Contract will be effective January 1, 2024, and will continue in full
force and effect through December 31, 2025, subject to Exhibit B,
Subsection 1.1.1 (Budget Contingency Clause), CMS waiver approval,
and Exhibit D(f), Section 9 (Federal Contract Funds).
B. If Contractor has not already commenced operations, the term of this
Contract consists of the following three periods:
1) The Implementation Period;
2) The Operations Period; and
3) The Phaseout Period.
C. The Operations Period will commence at the conclusion of the
Implementation Period, subject to DHCS acceptance of Contractor’s
readiness to begin the Operations Period. The term of the Operations
Period is subject to the termination requirements of Exhibit E, Subsections
1.1.16 (Termination) and 1.1.19, (Sanctions), and subject to the limitation
provisions of Exhibit B, Subsection 1.1.1 (Budget Contingency Clause).
D. The Phaseout Period will commence on the date the Operations Period or
Contract extension ends. The Phaseout Period will extend until all
activities required during the Phaseout Period for each Service Area are
fully completed to the satisfaction of DHCS, in its sole discretion.
E. If Contractor has commenced operations as of the effective date of this
Contract, the term of the Contract consists of the Operations Period and
the Phaseout Period. The term of the Operations Period is subject to the
termination requirements of Exhibit E, Subsections 1.1.16 (Termination)
and 1.1.19 (Sanctions) below and subject to the limitation requirements of
Exhibit B, Subsection 1.1.1 (Budget Contingency Clause).
1.1.14 Service Area
The Service Area covered under this Contract includes:
XXXXXXX County/ies
Unless otherwise specified in this Contract, all Contract provisions apply
separately to each Service Area. This Contract may expire for some Service
Areas and remain in effect for others with each Service Area having its own
Operations and Phaseout Periods.
1.1.15 Contract Extension
[[page 563]]
Exhibit E
Page 563 of 642
DHCS has the exclusive option to extend the term of the Contract for any Service
Area during the last 12 months of the Contract, as determined by the original
expiration date or by a new expiration date if an extension option has been
exercised. Contractor will be given at least nine months prior written notice of
DHCS’ decision on whether it will exercise this option to extend the Contract for
each Service Area.
Contractor will provide written notification to DHCS of its intent to accept or reject
the Contract extension within five Working Days of the receipt of the notice from
DHCS.
1.1.16 Termination
A. DHCS-Initiated Terminations
1) Mandatory Termination
a) DHCS must terminate this Contract in the event of any of the
following:
i. The Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health &
Human Services (U.S. DHHS) determines that
Contractor does not meet the requirements for
participation in the Medicaid program (42 United
States Code (USC) section 1396);
ii. DMHC finds that Contractor no longer qualifies for
licensure under the KKA (Health and Safety Code
(H&S) section 1340 et seq.), if licensure is required;
or
iii. The Director determines the health and welfare of
Members is jeopardized by continuation of the
Contract.
b) Termination pursuant to Subsection 1.16.A.1 (Mandatory
Termination) will be effective immediately. Termination under
this Section 1.16.A does not relieve Contractor of its
obligations under Exhibit E, Section 1.17 (Phaseout
Requirements).
2) Termination for Cause
a) DHCS may terminate this Contract and be relieved of any
payments should Contractor fail to perform the requirements
of this Contract. In the event of such termination, DHCS may
[[page 564]]
Exhibit E
Page 564 of 642
proceed with providing the services required under this
Contract in any manner deemed proper by DHCS. All costs
to the State will be deducted from any sum due Contractor
under this Contract and the balance, if any, will be paid to
Contractor upon demand.
b) DHCS will provide Contractor with at least 60 calendar days’
notice prior to the effective date of termination, unless
Potential Member harm requires a shorter notice period.
Contractor agrees that this notice provision is reasonable.
Termination under this Subsection does not relieve
Contractor of its obligations under Exhibit E, Subsection
1.1.17 (Phaseout Requirements).
c) DHCS will terminate this Contract under this Subsection,
pursuant to the provisions of W&I section 14197.7 and 22
CCR section 53873.
d) Contractor may dispute termination decisions under this
Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.16 (Termination), through the
dispute resolution process pursuant to Exhibit E, Subsection
1.1.21 (Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements).
3) Permissive Termination
Following a merger or acquisition involving Contractor in which
Contractor did not obtain DHCS’ express written consent pursuant
to Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.4 (Assignments, Mergers,
Acquisitions), whether Contractor is the merging party or the
acquiring party, DHCS, in its sole discretion, retains the right to
terminate this Contract.
a) DHCS will provide written notice of termination to Contractor
at least 60 calendar days prior to the effective date of
termination.
b) Contractor must fully perform all Contract obligations prior to
the effective date of termination. Contractor will not be
entitled to additional reimbursement for the services
provided following notice of termination until the termination
effective date.
c) Termination under this Subsection does not relieve
Contractor of its Phaseout Requirement obligations as stated
in Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.17 (Phaseout Requirements).
[[page 565]]
Exhibit E
Page 565 of 642
4) Termination Without Cause
a) DHCS may terminate this Contract and award a new
contract for one or more of the Service Areas to another
Medi-Cal managed care plan during one of the amendment
periods as described in Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.15
(Contract Extension).
b) Notwithstanding any other provision in this Contract, DHCS
may terminate this Contract in whole or in part at any time at
DHCS’ sole discretion.
c) DHCS will notify Contractor of termination under this Exhibit
E, Subsection 1.1.16 (Termination) at least six months prior
to the effective date of termination to allow for all Phaseout
Requirements to be completed.
B. Contractor-Initiated Terminations
Contractor may only terminate this Contract under one or more of the
following circumstances:
1) For Rating Periods subsequent to Calendar Year 2024, if
Contractor does not accept the Capitation Payment rates
determined by DHCS, or if DHCS decides to negotiate the
Capitation Payment rates and the parties do not agree on the rates;
or
2) When a change in contractual obligations is created by a State or
federal change in the Medi-Cal program or a lawsuit that
substantially alters the financial assumptions and conditions under
which Contractor entered into this Contract, such that Contractor
can demonstrate to the satisfaction of DHCS that it cannot remain
financially solvent through the term of the Contract, the following
will apply:
a) Contractor will submit a detailed written financial analysis to
DHCS supporting its conclusions that it cannot remain
financially solvent. At DHCS’ request, Contractor will submit
or otherwise make available to DHCS all of Contractor's
financial work papers, financial reports, financial books and
other records, bank statements, computer records, and any
other information requested by DHCS to evaluate
Contractor's financial analysis;
[[page 566]]
Exhibit E
Page 566 of 642
b) DHCS and Contractor may negotiate an earlier termination
date than the termination date set forth in this Subsection
1.16.B, if Contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
DHCS that it cannot remain financially solvent until the
termination date that would otherwise be established under
this Subsection;
c) Contractor must provide at least a six-month written notice of
termination under this Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.16
(Termination). The effective date of termination will be
December 31 of the year in which Contractor gives notice,
unless the date of notice is less than six months before
December 31. In that event, termination under this Exhibit E,
Subsection 1.1.16 (Termination) will be effective no earlier
than December 31 of the following year.
d) Termination under these circumstances does not relieve
Contractor of its obligations as stated in Exhibit E,
Subsection 1.1.17 (Phaseout Requirements).
C. Termination of Obligations
Contractor’s obligations to provide Covered Services under this Contract
or under any Contract extension terminate on the date the Operations
Period ends.
D. Notice to Members of Transfer of Care
Following notice of termination by either DHCS or Contractor, notice to the
Member will be directed by DHCS. Contractor will not send any notices to
its Members regarding the termination unless it receives prior approval
from DHCS.
1.1.17 Phaseout Requirements
A. DHCS will retain Capitation Payment for each Service Area from
Contractor’s Capitation Payment for the last four months of the Operations
Period for each Service Area, or Contractor must provide a performance
bond to DHCS of an equal amount, until all Directive Payment Initiatives
and Supplemental Payments have been calculated and processed by
DHCS and all activities required during the Phaseout Period for each
Service Area are fully completed to the satisfaction of DHCS, in its sole
discretion.
Upon DHCS’ processing of all Directive Payment Initiatives and
Supplemental Payments and the completion of all Phaseout Period
[[page 567]]
Exhibit E
Page 567 of 642
activities for each Service Area, the withhold will be paid to Contractor or
the performance bond will be released. If Contractor fails to meet any
requirements of the Phaseout Period for each Service Area, DHCS will
deduct the costs of the remaining activities from the withhold amount and
continue to withhold payment until all activities are completed.
B. The objective of the Phaseout Period is to ensure that, in connection with
the expiration or termination of this Contract, Contractor ensures an
orderly transfer of necessary data and history records to DHCS or to a
successor Medi-Cal managed care plan. Contractor will not provide
services to Members during the Phaseout Period.
Within no later than 90 calendar days prior to termination or expiration of
this Contract and through the Phaseout Period for each Service Area,
Contractor must assist DHCS in the transition of Members and in
ensuring, to the extent possible, continuity of Member-Provider
relationships. In doing this, Contractor will make available to DHCS,
without additional compensation, copies of each Member’s Medical
Records and files, and any other pertinent information, including
information maintained by any Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor,
or Network Provider, necessary to provide effected Members with case
management and continuity of care. In no circumstances will a Medi-Cal
Member be billed for this activity.
C. Phaseout for this Contract includes processing, payment, and monetary
and data reconciliations necessary regarding Provider claims for Covered
Services.
1) Phaseout for this Contract includes the completion of all financial
and reporting obligations of Contractor. Contractor will remain liable
for the processing and payment of invoices and other claims for
payment for Covered Services and other services provided to
Members prior to the expiration or termination of this Contract.
Contractor must timely submit to DHCS all reports required in
Exhibit A, Attachment III, Article 7.0 (Operations Deliverables and
Requirements) for the period from the last submitted report through
the expiration or termination date, and Contractor will be obligated
to cooperate with DHCS with regard to the reconciliation of
Contractor’s Encounter Data Reporting and Network Provider Data
Reporting for up to two years following the expiration or termination
of this Contract.
2) All data and information provided by Contractor will be
accompanied by a letter, signed by the responsible authority,
certifying, under penalty of perjury, to the accuracy and
completeness of the materials provided.
[[page 568]]
Exhibit E
Page 568 of 642
D. The Phaseout Period will commence on the date the Operations Period of
the Contract or Contract extension ends. Phaseout related activities are
non-payable obligations and services.
1.1.18 Indemnification
A. As a condition of entering into this Contract, Contractor agrees to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the State, DHCS and its officers,
agents, and employees from any and all claims and losses accruing or
resulting from any and all Network Providers, Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, suppliers, laborers, and any other person,
firm, or corporation furnishing or supplying work services, materials, or
supplies in connection with the performance of this Contract, and from any
and all claims and losses accruing or resulting to any person, firm or
corporation who may be injured or damaged by Contractor in the
performance of this Contract.
B. Contractor further agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
State, DHCS and its officers, agents, and employees from any and all
claims and losses, any and all attorneys’ fees and costs, judgments,
damages, and any Administrative Costs incurred by DHCS or a Member
from any and all litigation, arbitration or mediation resulting directly,
indirectly, or arising out of Contractor’s denial, delay, or modification of
requested Covered Services.
C. Contractor further agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
State, DHCS and its officers, agents and employees from any and all
claims and losses, any and all attorneys’ fees and costs, including DHCS’
defense costs, judgments, damages, any Administrative Costs incurred
from claims that Contractor violated the Telephone Consumer Protection
Act of 1991, 47 USC section 227 et seq., and/or related Federal
Communications Commission regulations in the performance of this
Contract.
D. Contractor further agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the
State, DHCS and its officers, agents and employees from any and all
claims and losses, any and all attorneys’ fees and costs, judgments,
damages, any Administrative Costs incurred to the extent DHCS is
required to provide notice to affected Members and Potential Members,
and any other costs associated with any actual or alleged breach, by
Contractor and any vendor, Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, or
Network Provider Contractor contracts with in the performance of this
Contract, of the following statutes and regulations: the of the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Public Law 104-191
(“HIPAA”), the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical
[[page 569]]
Exhibit E
Page 569 of 642
Health Act, Public Law 111-005 (“the HITECH Act"), 42 USC section
17921 et seq., and their implementing privacy and security regulations at
45 CFR parts 160 and 164 and the Information Practices Act, and Civil
Code (CC) section 1798 et seq. by Contractor.
E. DHCS is authorized to withhold any and all attorneys’ fees and costs,
judgments, damages, any Administrative Costs incurred pursuant to this
indemnification agreement, from Contractor’s next Capitation Payment or
any other method to recoup DHCS’ costs from Contractor.
1.1.19 Sanctions
A. Contractor is subject to sanctions and civil penalties for the specific
conduct set forth in 42 CFR sections 438.700, 438.702, 438.704, 438.706,
and 438.708. DHCS is also authorized to impose additional sanctions on
Contractor pursuant to 42 CFR section 438.702(b) as set forth in W&I
section 14197.7, APL 23-012, and any other applicable law.
B. Monetary sanctions imposed pursuant to W&I section 14197.7 may be
separately and independently assessed and may also be assessed for
each day Contractor fails to correct an identified deficiency. For
deficiencies that impact Members and Potential Members, each impacted
Member or Potential Member constitutes a separate violation for the
purposes of imposing a monetary sanction.
C. Good cause for imposing monetary sanctions includes but is not limited to
a breach of this Contract, a violation of a legal obligation (including, but
not limited to, obligations imposed by statute, regulation, APL, PL, or other
DHCS Guidance), a finding of deficiency that results in an improper denial
or delay in the delivery of health care services, potential endangerment of
a Member’s care, disruption in Contractor’s Network, failure to approve
continuity of care for a Member, failure to timely and correctly reimburse
claims, or a delay in required reporting to DHCS. Further grounds for
imposing sanctions include, but are not limited to, those set forth in 42
CFR section 438.700 et seq., W&I section 14197.7, and APL 23-012.
D. DHCS may identify findings of noncompliance or good cause through any
means, including, but not limited to, findings in audits; investigations;
contract compliance reviews; Quality Improvement System monitoring;
routine monitoring; facility site surveys; Encounter Data submissions;
Grievances and Appeals; Network adequacy reviews; assessments of
timely access requirements; reviews of utilization data; health plan rating
systems; State Hearing decisions; IMR decisions; complaints from
Members, Providers, Network Providers, Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, other stakeholders, or whistleblowers; and Contractor’s
self-disclosures.
[[page 570]]
Exhibit E
Page 570 of 642
E. Sanctions in the form of denial of payments provided for under this
Contract for new Members will be taken, when and for as long as,
payment for those Members is denied by CMS under 42 CFR section
438.730.
F. DHCS may also impose nonmonetary sanctions as set forth in 42 CFR
section 438.700 et seq., W&I section 14197.7, APL 23-012, and any other
applicable law.
G. DHCS is not required to impose a Corrective Action plan on Contractor
before imposing any of the sanctions set forth in this Section or in State
and federal law.
H. DHCS may impose sanctions in addition to any monetary damages
recovered pursuant to Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.20 (Liquidated Damages).
1.1.20 Liquidated Damages
A. If Contractor breaches this Contract, DHCS will be entitled to all legal and
equitable remedies available under the law, including monetary damages
in the form of actual, consequential, direct, indirect, special, and/or
liquidated damages.
B. Contractor agrees that any breach of this Contract, including but not
limited to a breach due to Contractor’s delay in implementing new program
requirements or plan readiness requirements or Contractor’s failure to
meet its Quality or Network Adequacy obligations, may result in damage
to the State or DHCS that is difficult to quantify. In the event of such a
breach, Contractor agrees that the Director is authorized to impose
liquidated damages on Contractor in the amount of $25,000 for each
separate and distinct breach in addition to liquidated damages in the
amount of $25,000 for each day Contractor fails to remedy the breach,
which the Parties agree bears a reasonable relationship to the range of
actual damages the Parties anticipate would flow from such a breach.
C. Contractor acknowledges that DHCS’ authority to impose monetary
sanctions and other intermediate sanctions pursuant to 42 CFR section
438.700 et seq. and W&I section 14197.7, as set forth in Exhibit E,
Subsection 1.1.19 (Sanctions), is separate and distinct, and that DHCS
may recover damages for Contractor’s breach, including liquidated
damages, in addition to any sanctions imposed under Exhibit E,
Subsection 1.1.19 (Sanctions).
1.1.21 Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements
[[page 571]]
Exhibit E
Page 571 of 642
Contractor must comply with and exhaust the requirements of this Section when
it initiates a contract dispute with DHCS. This Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.21
(Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements) does not apply to challenges to
sanctions as described in Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.19 (Sanctions) liquidated
damages as described in Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.20 (Liquidated Damages), or
any other contract compliance action initiated by DHCS. Contractor’s filing of a
Notice of Dispute, as defined in Paragraph B of this Section, does not preclude
DHCS from withholding or recouping the value of the amount in dispute from
Contractor, or from offsetting the amount in dispute from subsequent Capitation
Payment(s).
A. Resolution of Dispute by Negotiation
Contractor agrees to make best efforts to resolve all alleged contractual
issues by negotiation and mutual agreement at the DHCS Contracting
Officer level before appealing to the DHCS Office of Administrative
Hearings and Appeals (OAHA). Contractor must exhaust OAHA’s appeal
process before filing a writ in Sacramento County Superior Court. During
the negotiations to resolve Contractor’s issues, DHCS and Contractor may
agree, in writing, to an extension of time for continuing negotiations to
resolve Contractor’s dispute before the decision of the DHCS Contracting
Officer is issued.
B. Notice of Dispute
Within 30 calendar days from the date that the alleged dispute arises or
otherwise becomes known to Contractor, Contractor must serve a written
notice of dispute to the DHCS Contract Manager. Contractor’s failure to
serve its notice of dispute within 30 calendar days from the date the
alleged dispute arises or otherwise becomes known to Contractor
constitutes a waiver of all issues raised in Contractor’s notice of dispute.
Contractor's notice of dispute must include, based on the most accurate
information and substantiating documentation available to Contractor, the
following:
1) That the dispute is subject to the procedures in this Exhibit E,
Subsection 1.1.21 (Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements);
2) The date, nature, and circumstances of the alleged conduct that is
subject of the dispute;
3) The names, phone numbers, functions, and conduct of every
Subcontractor, Downstream Subcontractor, Network Provider,
DHCS/State official or employee involved in or knowledgeable of
the alleged issue(s) that is the subject of the dispute;
[[page 572]]
Exhibit E
Page 572 of 642
4) The identification of any substantiating documents and the
substance of any oral communications that are relevant to the
alleged conduct;
5) Copies of all substantiating documentation and any other evidence
attached to its notice of dispute;
6) The factual and legal bases supporting Contractor’s notice of
dispute;
7) The cost impact to Contractor directly attributable to the alleged
conduct, if any; and
8) Contractor’s desired remedy.
After Contractor submits its notice of dispute with all accurate available
substantiating documentation, Contractor must comply with 22 CCR
section 53851(d) and diligently continue performance of its obligations
under this Contract, including compliance with contract requirements that
are the subject of, or related to, Contractor’s notice of dispute.
If Contractor requests and DHCS agrees, Contractor’s notice of dispute
may be decided by an alternate dispute officer (ADO). DHCS will
designate an ADO who was not directly involved in the alleged conduct
that prompted Contractor’s notice of dispute.
Any appeal of the DHCS Contracting Officer’s decision to OAHA or a writ
seeking review of OAHA’s decision in Sacramento County Superior Court
is limited to the issues and arguments set forth and properly documented
in Contractor’s notice of dispute, that were not waived or resolved.
C. Timeframes
The DHCS Contracting Officer or ADO will have 90 calendar days to
review Contractor’s initial notice of dispute and available substantiating
documentation and issue a decision unless there is a written agreement
between DHCS and Contractor to extend that time. If the DHCS
Contracting Officer or ADO determines that additional substantiating
documentation is required, they will provide Contractor with a written
request identifying the issue(s) requiring additional supporting
documentation. Contractor must provide that additional substantiating
documentation no later than 30 calendar days from receipt of the request.
Unless Contractor and the DHCS Contracting Officer or ADO agree to an
extension of time, in writing, Contractor’s failure to provide additional
substantiating documentation, or otherwise notify the DHCS Contracting
[[page 573]]
Exhibit E
Page 573 of 642
Officer or ADO that no additional documents exist, within 30 calendar days
from the request, constitutes Contractor’s waiver of all issues raised in
Contractor’s notice of dispute.
Issues raised by Contractor in the notice of dispute will be decided by the
DHCS Contracting Officer or the ADO within 90 calendar days from
receipt of Contractor’s substantiating documentation or within 60 calendar
days from receipt of all additionally requested substantiating
documentation from Contractor, whichever is later.
D. The DHCS Contracting Officer's or ADO's Decision
1) If the DHCS Contracting Officer or the ADO finds in favor of
Contractor, they may:
a) Correct the conduct which prompted Contractor’s notice of
dispute; or
b) Require performance of the disputed conduct and, if there is
a cost impact sufficient to constitute a material change in
obligations pursuant to the payment provisions under Exhibit
B, Subsection 1.1.1 (Budget Contingency Clause), direct
DHCS to comply with that Exhibit. In the event of such a
finding DHCS will not owe interest on any underpayment
found due and owing pursuant to the notice of dispute.
2) If DHCS’ Contracting Officer or the ADO denies Contractor's notice
of dispute, they are authorized to direct the manner of Contractor’s
future contractual performance.
E. Appeal of the DHCS Contracting Officer's or ADO's Decision
1) Contractor will have 30 calendar days following the receipt of
DHCS Contracting Officer's or ADO's decision to appeal the
decision to the Director, through OAHA. All of Contractor’s appeals
will be governed by H&S section 100171, except Government Code
(GC) section 11511 relating to depositions will not apply. The venue
of OAHA appeals will be in Sacramento.
2) All of Contractor’s appeals must be in writing and must be filed with
OAHA and a copy sent to the Chief Counsel of DHCS and DHCS
Contract Manager. Contractor’s appeal will be deemed filed on the
date it is received by OAHA. Contractor’s appeal must specifically
set forth the unresolved issues that remain in dispute and issues
that have not been waived because of Contractor’s failure to
provide all substantiating documentation to DHCS, as specified in
[[page 574]]
Exhibit E
Page 574 of 642
Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.21 (Contractor’s Dispute Resolution
Requirements). Additionally, Contractor’s appeal is solely limited to
the issues raised in its notice of dispute that have not been
resolved or waived.
3) Contractor has the burden of proof of demonstrating that its position
is correct and must show by a preponderance of evidence that:
a) DHCS acted improperly such that it breached this Contract;
and
b) Contractor sustained a cost impact directly related to DHCS’
breach.
4) OAHA’s jurisdiction is limited to issues and arguments raised in the
notice of dispute that were not waived either by the untimely filing of
the notice of dispute or statement of disputed issues, or by
Contractor’s failure to provide all requested substantiating
documentation requested by DHCS Contracting Officer or ADO or
otherwise resolved by Contractor and DHCS.
5) Contractor’s failure to timely appeal the decision to OAHA
constitutes a waiver by Contractor of all issues raised in
Contractor’s notice of dispute. This waiver of claims also precludes
the filing of a writ in Sacramento Superior Court, or any other court.
F. No Obligation to Pay Interest
If Contractor prevails on its notice of dispute pursuant to a DHCS
Contracting Officer’s or ADO’s decision, an OAHA decision, or an order or
decision issued by any State or federal court, including any State or
federal court of appeal, or any order, decision, opinion, or award issued in
any other forum, DHCS will not be required to pay interest on any
amounts found to be due or owing to Contractor arising out of the notice of
dispute.
G. Contractor’s Duty to Perform
Contractor must comply with all requirements of 22 CCR section 53851(d)
and all obligations under this Contract, including continuing Contract
requirements that are the subject of, or related to, Contractor’s notice of
dispute until there is a final decision from the DHCS Contracting Officer,
the ADO or a decision on an appeal in Sacramento County Superior
Court.
H. Waiver of Claims
[[page 575]]
Exhibit E
Page 575 of 642
Contractor waives all claims or issues if it fails to timely submit a notice of
dispute with all substantiating documents within the timeframes noted in
Subsection 1.1.21.C, above. Contractor also waives all claims or issues
set forth in its notice of dispute if it fails to timely submit all additional
substantiating documentation within 30 calendar days of the DHCS
Contracting Officer’s or ADO’s request, or if it fails to timely appeal the
DHCS Contracting Officer’s or ADO’s decision in the manner and within
the time specified in this Subsection 1.1.21. Contractor’s waiver includes
all damages whether direct or consequential in nature.
1.1.22 Inspection and Audit of Records and Facilities
A. Recordkeeping Requirements
1) Records to be Maintained
Contractor must maintain all records and documents necessary to
disclose how Contractor discharges its obligations under this
Contract. These records and documents will disclose the quantity of
Covered Services provided under this Contract, the quality of those
services, the manner and amount of payment made for those
services, the persons eligible to receive Covered Services, the
manner in which Contractor administered its daily business, and the
cost thereof.
Contractor must maintain all working papers, reports submitted to
(DHCS, DMHC, Division of Medi-Cal Fraud & Elder Abuse
(DMFEA), United States Department of Health & Human Services
(U.S. DHHS), and United States Department of Justice (US DOJ),
financial records, books of account, Medical Records, prescription
files, laboratory results, Subcontractor Agreements, Downstream
Subcontractor Agreements, and Network Provider Agreements,
information systems and procedures, and any other documentation
pertaining to medical and non-medical services rendered to
Members.
In addition, and in accordance with 42 CFR section 438.3(u),
Contractor must retain the following information for no less than ten
years and allow auditing entities to inspect and audit:
a) Member Grievance and Appeal records as required in 42
CFR section 438.416;
b) Base data as defined in 42 CFR section 438.5(c);
[[page 576]]
Exhibit E
Page 576 of 642
c) MLR reports as required in 42 CFR section 438.8(k); and
d) Data, information, and documentation specified in 42 CFR
sections 438.604, 438.606, 438.608, and 438.610.
2) Records Retention Period
Notwithstanding any other records retention time period set forth in
this Contract, Contractor must maintain all records and documents
described in this Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.22 (Inspection and Audit
of Records and Facilities) for a minimum of ten years from the final
date of the Phaseout Period or from the date of completion of any
audit, whichever is later, in accordance with 42 CFR sections
438.3(h) and (u) and 438.230(c).
B. Right to Audit and Inspect Records and Facilities
1) Authorized Agencies
Contractor agrees that the following agencies, including but not
limited to, DHCS, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS), U.S. DHHS, U.S. DHHS Office of the Inspector General, the
Comptroller General of the United States, US DOJ, DMFEA,
DMHC, the External Quality Review Organization (EQRO)
contractor, and all other agencies authorized under State and
federal law (authorized agencies), and their duly authorized
representatives or designees, will have the right to audit and
inspect the records and documents in the form or manner in which
the authorized agencies request, and facilities of Contractor, and its
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers.
2) Right to Audit and Inspect at Any Time
DHCS, and its designees, and other authorized agencies and their
designees, may, at any time, inspect and audit any and all records,
documents, contracts, computers, or other electronic systems
maintained by Contractor, and its Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers in the form or manner in
which the authorized agencies request, and may, at any time,
inspect the premises, facilities, and equipment pertaining directly or
indirectly to the delivery of Medi-Cal services pursuant to 42 CFR
sections 438.3(h) and (u) and 438.230(c), and other applicable
State and federal law.
3) Scope of Inspection
[[page 577]]
Exhibit E
Page 577 of 642
DHCS and other authorized agencies may, at any time, audit,
inspect, and monitor, Contractor, and its Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and Network Providers, to assure
compliance with any provision of this Contract; evaluate the quality,
appropriateness, and timeliness of services performed under this
Contract; and for any other reasonable purpose.
Upon request, and through the end of the records retention period
specified in Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.22.A.2 (Inspection and Audit
of Records and Facilities), Contractor must furnish any record, or
copy of it, to DHCS or any other auditing entity listed in this Exhibit
E, Subsection 1.1.22 (Inspection and Audit of Records and
Facilities), at Contractor's sole expense.
4) Right to Audit and Inspect Exists for Ten Years
The right to audit and inspect under this this Exhibit E, Subsection
1.1.22 (Inspection and Audit of Records and Facilities) exists for ten
years from the final date of the Contract Phaseout Period or from
the date of completion of any audit, whichever is later, in
accordance with 42 CFR sections 438.3(h) and (u) and 438.230(c).
5) Additional Facility Inspection Rights
In addition to Exhibit D(f), Section 8 (Site Inspection) in order to
ensure compliance with this Contract, and for any other reasonable
purpose, Contractor agrees to the following:
a) DHCS, and its authorized representatives and designees,
and authorized agencies, and their authorized
representatives and designees, will have the right to access
the premises and facilities of Contractor, and the premises
and facilities of its Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers, with or without
notice, including, but not limited to, the management
information systems operations site or such other places
where duties and obligations under the Contract are
performed.
b) Staff designated by DHCS, and the designated staff of other
authorized agencies, must be provided access to security
areas of all Contractor, and its Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors,’ and Network Providers, . Contractor must
provide, and must require any and all of its Subcontractors,
Downstream Subcontractors, and Network Providers to
[[page 578]]
Exhibit E
Page 578 of 642
provide, reasonable cooperation and assistance to auditing
representatives in the performance of their duties.
c) DHCS may conduct unannounced inspections and audits of
the premises and facilities of Contractor, and its
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers, selected at DHCS' sole discretion, to verify
compliance of these sites with DHCS requirements.
1.1.23 Confidentiality of Information
In addition to Exhibit D(f), Section 14 (Confidentiality of Information), Contractor
also agrees to the following duties and responsibilities with respect to
confidentiality of information and data:
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Contract, names of persons
receiving public social services are confidential and are to be protected
from unauthorized disclosure in accordance with 42 CFR section 431.300
et seq., W&I section 14100.2, and regulations adopted thereunder. For the
purpose of this Contract, all information, records, data, and data elements
collected and maintained for the operation of the Contract and pertaining
to Members will be protected by Contractor.
Contractor may release Medical Records in accordance with applicable
law pertaining to the release of this type of information. Contractor is not
required to report to DHCS requests for Medical Records made in
accordance with applicable law, unless the law requires such reporting.
B. With respect to any identifiable information obtained by Contractor, or its
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, or Network Providers,
concerning a Member under this Contract, Contractor will ensure the
following:
1) Any such information will not be used for any purpose other than
carrying out the express terms of this Contract;
2) All requests for disclosure of such information will be promptly
transmitted to DHCS, except requests for Medical Records in
accordance with applicable law;
3) Any such information will not be disclosed, except as otherwise
specifically permitted by this Contract, to any party other than
DHCS without DHCS' prior written authorization specifying that the
information is releasable under 42 CFR section 431.300 et seq.,
W&I section 14100.2, and regulations adopted thereunder; and
[[page 579]]
Exhibit E
Page 579 of 642
4) At the termination of this Contract, the return all such information to
DHCS or maintain such information as directed by DHCS.
C. Contractor will have provisions in its Subcontractor Agreements and
Network Provider Agreements requiring Subcontractors, Downstream
Subcontractors, and Network Providers to comply with this Exhibit E,
Subsection 1.1.23 (Confidentiality of Information).
1.1.24 Pilot Projects
DHCS may establish pilot projects to test alternative managed care models
tailored to suit the needs of populations with special health care needs. The
operation of these pilot projects may result in the disenrollment of Members that
participate. Implementation of a pilot project may affect Contractor’s obligations
under this Contract. Any changes in the obligations of Contractor that are
necessary for the operation of a pilot project in Contractor’s Service Area will be
implemented through a contract amendment.
1.1.25 Cost Avoidance and Post-Payment Recovery of Other Health Coverage
A. Contractor must Cost Avoid or make a Post-Payment Recovery (PPR) for
the reasonable value of services paid by Contractor and rendered to a
Member whenever a Member's Other Health Coverage (OHC) covers the
same services, fully or partially. However, in no event may Contractor
Cost Avoid or seek PPR for the reasonable value of services from a Third-
Party Tort Liability (TPTL) action or make a claim against the estates of
deceased Members.
B. Contractor must, at a minimum, utilize the Medi-Cal eligibility record for
Cost Avoidance and PPR purposes.
C. Contractor retains all monies for PPR when Contractor initiates and
completes recovery within 12 months from the date of payment of a
service. Any monies for PPR obtained after the 12 months following the
date of payment of a service are considered Medi-Cal recoveries and
must be remitted to DHCS.
D. If Contractor initiates an active repayment plan with Network Providers or
third-party insurance carriers that is agreed upon prior to, and extends
beyond 12 months from, the date of payment of a service, Contractor will
be allowed to retain the recovered monies.
E. Contractor must coordinate benefits with other coverage programs and
entitlements, recognizing the OHC as primary and the Medi-Cal program
as the payer of last resort, except for services in which Medi-Cal is
required to be the primary payer.
[[page 580]]
Exhibit E
Page 580 of 642
F. If Contractor does not perform PPR for a Member with OHC, Contractor
must demonstrate to DHCS, upon request, that the cost of PPR exceeds
the total Contract Revenues Contractor projects it would receive from such
activity.
G. Cost Avoidance
1) Contractor must not pay claims for services provided to a Member
whose Medi-Cal eligibility record indicates third-party coverage,
designated by an OHC code or Medicare coverage, without proof
that the Provider has first exhausted all sources of other payments.
Acceptable forms of proof that all sources of payment have been
exhausted or do not apply include a denial letter from the OHC for
the service, an explanation of benefits indicating that the service is
not covered by the OHC, or documentation demonstrating that
Provider has billed the OHC and received no response for at least
90 calendar days.
2) Contractor must ensure that Providers do not refuse to provide
Covered Services to Members, when OHC is indicated on a
Member’s Medi-Cal eligibility record.
3) Contractor must allow Providers to direct bill services that meet
DHCS’ requirements for direct billing without attempting to Cost
Avoid those services. Cost Avoidance is not required prior to
payment for services provided to Members with OHC codes A or N.
More information on services that qualify for direct billing can be
found in the Medi-Cal Provider Manual, Part 2 – General Medicine,
section “Other Health Coverage (OHC): CPT-4 and HCPCS Codes
(oth hlth cpt)”.
4) Prior to delivering services, Contractor must ensure that Providers
review the Member’s Medi-Cal eligibility record for third-party
coverage, designated by OHC or Medicare coverage code. If the
Member’s Medi-Cal eligibility record indicates OHC and the
requested service is covered by OHC, Contractor must ensure that
Providers notify the Member to seek the service from OHC.
5) When Contractor denies a claim due to OHC, Contractor must
include OHC information in its notice of claim denial to Provider.
OHC information includes, but is not limited to, the name of the
OHC or Medicare carrier, and contact or billing information of the
OHC.
H. Reporting Requirements for Cost Avoidance
[[page 581]]
Exhibit E
Page 581 of 642
Contractor must report new OHC information not found on the Medi-Cal
eligibility record or that is different from what is reflected on the Medi-Cal
eligibility record to DHCS within ten calendar days of discovery. Contractor
must report discrepancies in the Medi-Cal record by either completing and
submitting an OHC removal or addition form found online at
https://www.dhcs.ca.gov or reporting OHC information to DHCS in batch
updates. Batch updates regarding OHC information are processed by
DHCS on a weekly basis. Contractor may contact its DHCS Contract
Manager for more information regarding this process.
I. Post-Payment Recovery
1) Contractor must pay Provider's claim and then seek to recover the
cost of the claim by billing the liable third parties in either of the
following circumstances:
a) The Member had OHC code A on their Medi-Cal eligibility
record at the time of service; or
b) For services defined by DHCS as preventive pediatric
services.
2) When Contractor discovers that a service was provided to a
Member with OHC designated in the Medi-Cal eligibility record, and
Contractor did not properly Cost Avoid the service, then Contractor
must bill the OHC for the cost of actual services rendered. If OHC is
discovered retroactively, Contractor must also bill the OHC for the
cost of actual services rendered.
3) Contractor must bill the liable OHC for the cost of services provided
to Members. Billing and recoupment must be completed within 12
months from the date of payment of a service.
4) Monies recovered by DHCS or DHCS’ contracted recovery agent
starting on the first day of the 13
th month after the date of payment
of a service will be retained by DHCS.
J. Reporting Requirements
Contractor must submit a monthly PPR Report to DHCS via Secure File
Transfer Protocol (SFTP) by the 15
th day of each month in a format
specified by DHCS in APLs. This report must contain claims and recovery
information and any other information specified by DHCS in APLs.
[[page 582]]
Exhibit E
Page 582 of 642
K. Contractor must have written policies and procedures implementing all of
the requirements of this Subsection 1.1.25 (Cost Avoidance and Post-
Payment Recovery of Other Health Coverage).
1.1.26 Third-Party Tort and Workers’ Compensation Liability
Contractor must not make a claim for recovery of the value of Covered Services
rendered to a Member in cases or instances involving casualty insurance, tort,
Workers’ Compensation, or class action claims. Contractor’s failure to comply
with this provision is non-delegable. In the event that Contractor’s failure to
comply with this provision negatively impacts DHCS’ ability to recover its full
statutory lien, DHCS reserves the right to deduct any losses from Contractor’s
Capitation Payments. To assist DHCS in exercising DHCS’ exclusive
responsibility for recovering casualty insurance, tort, Workers’ Compensation, or
class action claims, Contractor must meet the following requirements:
A. Within 30 calendar days of DHCS’ request, submit all requested service
and utilization information and, when requested, copies of paid
invoices/claims for its Members, including information from Network
Providers, out-of-Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors. Service and utilization information and copies of paid
invoices/claims must set out any services provided by Contractor,
including, but not limited to, physical, mental, and dental health services.
Records must include services provided on a Fee-For-Service, capitated
basis, and any other payment arrangements, regardless of whether a
payment was made or denied. The reasonable value of the services must
be calculated as the usual, customary, and reasonable charge made to
the general public for similar services, or the amount paid to Network
Providers or out-of-Network Providers for similar services. No additional
payment will be made to Contractor for compliance with this provision.
B. Submit the requested service and utilization information and paid
invoices/claims in a form and manner specified by DHCS through DHCS
designated SFTP, in compliance with the electronic format and process,
as set forth in APLs . Contractor must include the attestation in a form and
manner specified by DHCS signed by the custodian of records or a
designee with knowledge of the Member Information provided to DHCS,
as set forth in APLs.
C. Notify DHCS using the appropriate online notification form at the Third
Party Liability and Recovery Division Online Forms page,
https://dhcs.ca.gov/PIForms, within ten calendar days of receiving a
request from attorneys, insurers, or Members for a lien, pursuant to
DHCS’ recovery rights. These requirements do not relieve Contractor of
other legal duties to Contractor’s Members or other entities, including,
without limitation, the duty to respond to Members’ requests for their own
[[page 583]]
Exhibit E
Page 583 of 642
Protected Health Information pursuant to the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
D. Use the TPLManagedCare@dhcs.ca.gov inbox for all communications
regarding Contractor’s service and utilization information and copies of
paid invoices/claims file submissions, to submit questions or comments
related to the preparation and submission of these reports, and for issues
related to accessing the SFTP folders.
E. Have written policies and procedures implementing all of the requirements
of this Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.26 (Third-Party Tort and Workers’
Compensation Liability).
1.1.27 Litigation Support
A. Records
Upon request by DHCS, Contractor must timely gather, preserve, and
provide, in the form and manner specified by DHCS, any information,
subject to any lawful privileges, in the possession of Contractor or its
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, or Network Providers ,
relating to threatened or pending litigation by or against DHCS. If
Contractor asserts that any requested documents are covered by a lawful
privilege, Contractor must:
1) Sufficiently identify the claimed privileged documents to reasonably
identify the documents; and
2). State the privilege being claimed that supports withholding
production of the document.
Contractor agrees to promptly provide DHCS with a copy of any
documents provided to any party in any litigation by or against DHCS.
Contractor acknowledges that time is of the essence in responding to such
a request. Contractor will use its best efforts to immediately notify DHCS
of any subpoenas, document production requests, or requests for records
received by Contractor or its Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors,
or Network Providers related to this Contract or the Subcontractor
Agreements, Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, and Network
Provider Agreements entered into under this Contract.
B. Document Authentication and Testimony
Contractor will make its personnel and employees available to DHCS to
authenticate documents, provide testimony as a witness, act as a “person
most knowledgeable,” and assist in other ways as requested by DHCS, in
[[page 584]]
Exhibit E
Page 584 of 642
connection with litigation, Public Record Acts requests, subpoenas,
inquiries, and/or audits by federal and State agencies and departments,
and inquiries by third-parties, as requested by DHCS. No additional
payments will be paid to Contractor for the activities described in this
Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.27 (Litigation Support).
1.1.28 Equal Opportunity Employer
Contractor must comply with all applicable federal and State employment
discrimination laws. Contractor, must:
A. In all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf
of Contractor, state that it is an equal opportunity employer;
B. Send to each labor union or representative of workers with which it has a
collective bargaining agreement or other contract or understanding, a
DHCS-approved notice, advising the labor union or workers'
representative of its commitment as an equal opportunity employer and
post copies of the notice in conspicuous places available to employees
and applicants for employment;
C. Not unlawfully discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, religious creed, color, national origin,
ancestry, physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, genetic
information, marital status, sex, gender, gender identity, gender
expression, age, sexual orientation, or military and veteran status;
D. Ensure that the evaluation and treatment of its employees and applicants
for employment are free of such discrimination and comply with the
provisions of the Fair Employment and Housing Act (GC §12900 et seq.),
and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder (2 CCR § 11000 et
seq.). The applicable regulations of the Fair Employment and Housing
Council implementing GC section 12990, set forth in Subchapter 5 of
Division 4.1 of Title 2 of the California Code of Regulations are
incorporated into this Contract by reference and made a part hereof as if
set forth in full;
E. Give written notice of their obligations under this clause to labor
organizations with which they have a collective bargaining or other
agreement; and
F. Include the nondiscrimination and compliance provisions of this clause in
all contracts to perform work under the Contract, in accordance with 2
CCR section 11105.
[[page 585]]
Exhibit E
Page 585 of 642
1.1.29 Federal and State Nondiscrimination Requirements
Contractor must:
A. Comply with federal nondiscrimination requirements in Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964; Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972; the
Age Discrimination Act of 1975; Sections 504 and 508 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended; Titles II and III of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended; Section 1557 of the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010; and federal implementing
regulations promulgated under the above-listed statutes; and
B. Comply with California nondiscrimination requirements, including, without
limitation, the Unruh Civil Rights Act, GC sections 7405 and 11135, W&I
section 14029.91, and State implementing regulations.
1.1.30 Discrimination Prohibitions
A. Member Discrimination Prohibition
Contractor must not unlawfully discriminate against Members or Potential
Members on the basis of any characteristic protected under federal or
State nondiscrimination law, including sex, race, color, religion, ancestry,
national origin, creed, ethnic group identification, age, mental disability,
physical disability, medical condition, genetic information, marital status,
gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or identification with any other
persons or groups defined in Penal Code section 422.56, in accordance
with the statutes identified in Exhibit E, Subsection 1.1.29 (Federal and
State Nondiscrimination Requirements) above, rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, or as otherwise provided by law. For the
purpose of this Contract, discrimination includes, but is not limited to,
unlawfully:
1) Denying any Member Covered Services or availability of a Facility;
2) Providing a Member with any Covered Service that is different, or is
provided in a different manner or at a different time from that which
is provided to other Members under this Contract except where
medically indicated;
3) Subjecting a Member to segregation, separate treatment, or
harassment in any manner related to the receipt of any Covered
Service;
4) Restricting or harassing a Member in any way in the enjoyment of
any advantage or privilege enjoyed by others receiving any
[[page 586]]
Exhibit E
Page 586 of 642
Covered Service; treating a Member or Potential Member differently
from others in determining whether they satisfy any admission,
Enrollment, quota, eligibility, membership; or adding other
requirements or conditions which Members must meet in order to
be provided any Covered Service;
5) Assigning times or places for the provision of services on the basis
of the sex, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, creed,
ethnic group identification, age, mental disability, physical disability,
medical condition, genetic information, marital status, gender,
gender identity, sexual orientation, or identification with any other
persons or groups defined in Penal Code section 422.56, to the
Members to be served;
6) Utilizing criteria or methods of administration which have the effect
of subjecting individuals to discrimination;
7) Failing to make Auxiliary Aids available, or to make reasonable
accommodations in policies, practices, or procedures, when
necessary to avoid discrimination on the basis of disability; and
8) Failing to ensure meaningful access to programs and activities for
Limited English Proficient (LEP) Members and Potential Members.
B. Member Affirmative Action
Contractor must take affirmative action to ensure that Members are
provided Covered Services without regard to sex, race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, creed, ethnic group identification, age, mental
disability, physical disability, medical condition, genetic information, marital
status, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, or identification with
any other persons or groups defined in Penal Code section 422.56, except
as needed to provide equal access to LEP Members or Members with
disabilities, or where medically indicated. For the purposes of this Section,
genetic information includes the carrying of a gene which may, under
some circumstances, be associated with disability in that person's
offspring, but which causes no adverse effects on the carrier. Such genes
will include, but are not limited to, Tay-Sachs trait, sickle cell trait,
thalassemia trait, and X-linked hemophilia.
C. Discrimination Related To Health Status
Contractor must not discriminate against Members or Potential Members
on the basis of their health status or requirements for health care services
during Enrollment, re-Enrollment or disenrollment. Contractor must not
[[page 587]]
Exhibit E
Page 587 of 642
terminate the Enrollment of a Member based on an adverse change in the
Member’s health.
1.1.31 Small Business Participation and Disabled Veteran Business Enterprises
Reporting Requirements
A. Contractor must comply with applicable requirements of California law
relating to Disabled Veteran Business Enterprises (DVBE) commencing at
Public Contract (PC) Code section 10230.
B. If for this Contract, Contractor made a commitment to achieve small
business participation, then Contractor must annually and within 60
calendar days of receiving final payment under this Contract report to
DHCS the actual percentage of small business participation that was
achieved (GC § 14841).
C. If for this Contract, Contractor made a commitment to achieve DVBE
participation, then Contractor must annually and within 60 calendar days
of receiving final payment under this Contract certify in a report to DHCS:
1) The total amount Contractor received under the Contract;
2) The name and address of the DVBE(s) that participated in the
performance of the Contract;
3) The amount each DVBE received from Contractor;
4) That all payments under the Contract have been made to the
DVBE; and
5) The actual percentage of DVBE participation that was achieved.
(Military and Veterans Code § 999.5(d); GC § 14841
1.1.32 Conflict of Interest Avoidance Requirements
Contractor will comply with all requirements relating to Contractor’s
obligations to avoid conflicts of interest as described in Exhibit H (Conflict of
Interest Avoidance Requirements).
1.1.33 Guaranty Provision
If Contractor is a subsidiary of another entity, Contractor must submit a
guaranty from any entity in Contractor’s chain of ownership that is publicly
traded. If no such parent entity is publicly traded, the guaranty must be
submitted by a parent entity at a level in the chain of ownership that is
acceptable to DHCS. The guaranty must meet all requirements set forth in
[[page 588]]
Exhibit E
Page 588 of 642
Exhibit I (Contractor’s Parent Guaranty Requirements) of this Contract and be
in a form satisfactory to DHCS, and provide for the full and prompt
performance of all covenants, terms and conditions, and agreements
throughout the term of the Contract.
1.1.34 Priority of Provisions
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of Exhibit D(f) (Special Terms
and Conditions) and any other Exhibits of this Contract, the provisions in the
other Exhibits will prevail over the provisions in Exhibit D(f). Additionally, where
Exhibit D(f) contains provisions on the same subject matter as a provision in
another Exhibit of this Contract, the language in the other Exhibit preempt and
prevail over the language in Exhibit D(f).
In the event of a conflict between any Article summary (Articles 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0,
6.0, and 7.0) and a more specific term in this Contract, the more specific term will
prevail over the Article summary.
1.1.35 Additional Incorporated Provisions – Proposals
Any and all final Proposals, including Exhibits and Attachments (collectively
referred to as “Proposal”), submitted by Contractor in response to the Request
for Proposal 20-10029 (RFP), or any subsequent Requests for Proposal in
connection with any managed care contract, are hereby incorporated by
reference into this Contract. DHCS is relying on Contractor’s representations in
Contractor’s Proposal in awarding contracts, and, accordingly, DHCS may
enforce such representations against Contractor, including, but not limited to,
representations that it will perform in a certain manner, provide enhanced
services, and/or meet more stringent requirements than those required in the
Contract. Contractor is required to obtain written approval from DHCS before
implementing any such enhanced services or requirements reflected in
Contractor’s Proposal. In the event the Proposal(s) does not address Contract
requirements, the Contract will govern.
1.1.36 Miscellaneous Provisions
A. Antitrust Claims
By signing this Contract, Contractor hereby certifies that if these services
or goods are obtained by means of a competitive bid, Contractor must
comply with the Antitrust Claims requirements of the GC sections 4550 et
seq..
B. Child Support Compliance Act
[[page 589]]
Exhibit E
Page 589 of 642
Contractor recognizes the importance of Child and family support
obligations and must fully comply with all applicable State and federal laws
relating to Child and family support enforcement (Chapter 8 (commencing
with section 5200) of Part 5 of Division 9 of the Family Code).
C. Priority Hiring Considerations
Contractor must give priority consideration in filling vacancies in positions
funded by the Contract to qualified recipients of aid under W&I section
11200 in accordance with PC section 10353.
D. Interoperability
1) Contractor must comply with the CMS Interoperability and Patient
Access Final Rule, as set forth in 42 CFR sections 406, 407, 422,
423, 431, 438, 457, 482 and 485, and 45 CFR section 156.
2) Contractor must ensure that its contracted hospitals comply with
the electronic notification requirements as set forth in 42 CFR
section 482.24(d).
3) Contractor must participate in the California Health and Human
Services Data Exchange Framework to exchange health
information or provide access to health information to and from
various entities in real time as set forth in H&S section 130290.
E Electronic Visit Verification
All Network Providers who are eligible must comply with Electronic Visit
Verification (EVV) requirements.
1) Contractor must collaborate with DHCS, and take action as
required by DHCS, to comply with and ensure that its
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers comply with federal requirements for Electronic Visit
Verification (EVV) set forth in 42 USC section 1396b(l) and with
State requirements for EVV set forth in W&I section 14043.51,
Section 12006(a) of the Federal Cures Act, and APL 22-014.
2) Contractor must implement and ensure that its applicable
Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and Network
Providers implement a State-approved EVV solution, as required,
for personal care services and home health care services provided
in a Member’s home.
[[page 590]]
Exhibit E
Page 590 of 642
3) Contractor must verify that all Network Providers capture and
transmit the following six mandatory data components when
providing Personal Care Services and Home Health Care Services
in a Member’s home:
a) The type of service performed;
b) The individual receiving the service;
c) The date of the service;
d) The location of service delivery;
e) The individual providing the service; and
f) The time the service begins and ends.
4) Contractor must monitor and ensure all Network Providers comply
with the EVV requirements when rendering personal care services
and home health care services, subject to federal EVV
requirements in accordance with APL 22-014 and the established
guidelines below:
a) Monitor providers for compliance with the EVV requirements
and Information Notice(s), and alert DHCS to any
compliance issues.
b) Supply Providers with technical assistance and training on
EVV compliance.
c) Require Providers to comply with an approved corrective
action plan.
d) Deny payment if the Provider is not complying with EVV
requirements and arrange for Members to receive services
from a Provider who does comply.
1.1.37 Data Sharing
A. General Statement
Contractor must transfer all data in compliance with the terms of this
Contract, including but not limited to the requirements of Exhibit G
(Business Associate Addendum). Nothing in this Contract is exhaustive,
exclusive, or limiting of DHCS’ ability to provide data to Contractor or
receive data from Contractor should DHCS determine, in its sole
[[page 591]]
Exhibit E
Page 591 of 642
discretion, that the data is necessary and appropriate for Contractor to
perform its duties under this Contract.
B. Post-Termination/Expiration Transactions; Survival of Terms
When this Contract terminates or expires, Contractor must continue to
exchange data in order to facilitate an orderly phaseout of Contract
requirements including, but not limited to, data sharing in connection with
continuity of care for Members, Encounter Data reconciliation, Network
Provider Data Reporting, and payment reconciliation. These phaseout
transactions will require the transfer of data between Contractor and
DHCS, including Protected Health Information (PHI) and other potentially
sensitive data. To facilitate the safe and secure transfer of data, all
requirements of this Contract pertaining to the transfer of data, including
but not limited to Exhibit G (Business Associate Addendum), will survive
the termination or expiration of this Contract for as long as any PHI or
other sensitive data remains in the possession of Contractor. This
Subsection is intended to supplement and not replace the requirements of
Exhibit G (Business Associate Addendum) regarding data sharing.
[[page 592]]
Exhibit F
Page 592 of 642
Exhibit F – Contractor’s Release
Contractor’s Release
Instructions to Contractor:
With final invoice(s), submit one (1) original and one (1) copy. The original must
bear the original signature of a person authorized to bind Contractor. The additional
copy may bear photocopied signatures.
Submission of Final Invoice
Pursuant to contract number entered into between the Department of Health
Care Services (DHCS) and Contractor (identified below), Contractor does acknowledge
that final payment has been requested via invoice number(s) , in the amount(s)
of $ and dated . If necessary, enter "See Attached" in the appropriate
blocks and attach a list of invoice numbers, dollar amounts and invoice dates.
Release of all Obligations
By signing this form, and upon receipt of the amount specified in the invoice number(s)
referenced above, Contractor does hereby release and discharge the State, its officers,
agents and employees of and from any and all liabilities, obligations, claims, and
demands whatsoever arising from the above referenced contract.
Repayments Due to Audit Exceptions / Record Retention
By signing this form, Contractor acknowledges that expenses authorized for
reimbursement do not guarantee final allowability of said expenses. Contractor agrees
that the amount of any sustained audit exceptions resulting from any subsequent audit
made after final payment will be refunded to the State.
All expense and accounting records related to the above referenced contract must be
maintained for audit purposes for no less than three years beyond the date of final
payment, unless a longer term is stated in said contract.
Recycled Product Use Certification
By signing this form, Contractor certifies under penalty of perjury that a minimum of 0%
unless otherwise specified in writing of postconsumer material, as defined in the Public
Contract Code Section 12200, in products, materials, goods, or supplies offered or sold
to the State regardless of whether it meets the requirements of Public Contract Code
Section 12209. Contractor specifies that printer or duplication cartridges offered or sold
to the State comply with the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 12156(e).
[[page 593]]
Exhibit F
Page 593 of 642
Reminder to Return State Equipment/Property (If Applicable)
(Applies only if equipment was provided by DHCS or purchased with or reimbursed by
contract funds)
Unless DHCS has approved the continued use and possession of State equipment (as
defined in the above referenced contract) for use in connection with another DHCS
agreement, Contractor agrees to promptly initiate arrangements to account for and
return said equipment to DHCS, at DHCS' expense, if said equipment has not passed
its useful life expectancy as defined in the above referenced contract.
Patents / Other Issues
By signing this form, Contractor further agrees, in connection with patent matters and
with any claims that are not specifically released as set forth above, that it will comply
with all of the provisions contained in the above referenced contract, including, but not
limited to, those provisions relating to notification to the State and related to the defense
or prosecution of litigation.
ONLY SIGN AND DATE THIS DOCUMENT WHEN ATTACHING IT TO THE FINAL
INVOICE
Contractor’s Legal Name (as on contract):
Signature of Contractor or Official Designee:
Date:
Printed Name/Title of Person Signing:
Distribution: Accounting (Original) Program
[[page 594]]
Exhibit G
Page 594 of 642
Exhibit G – Business Associate Addendum
1. This Agreement has been determined to constitute a business associate relationship
under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and its
implementing privacy and security regulations at 45 Code of Federal Regulations
parts 160 and 164 (collectively, and as used in this Agreement)
2. The term “Agreement” as used in this document refers to and includes both this
Business Associate Addendum and the contract to which this Business Associate
Agreement is attached as an exhibit, if any.
3. For purposes of this Agreement, the term “Business Associate” shall have the same
meaning as set forth in 45 CFR section 160.103.
4. The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) intends that Business Associate
may create, receive, maintain, transmit or aggregate certain information pursuant to
the terms of this Agreement, some of which information may constitute Protected
Health Information (PHI) and/or confidential i nformation protected by federal and/or
State laws.
4.1 As used in this Agreement and unless otherwise stated, the term “PHI” refers to
and includes both “PHI” as defined at 45 CFR section 160.103 and Personal
Information (PI) as defined in the Information Practices Act (IPA) at California Civil
Code section 1798.3(a). PHI includes information in any form, including paper,
oral, and electronic.
4.2 As used in this Agreement, the term “confidential information” refers to information
not otherwise defined as PHI in Section 4.1 of this Agreement, but to which State
and/or federal privacy and/or security protections apply.
5. Contractor (however named elsewhere in this Agreement) is the Business Associate
of DHCS acting on DHCS’ behalf and provides services or arranges, performs or
assists in the performance of functions or activities on behalf of DHCS, and may
create, receive, maintain, transmit, aggregate, use or disclose PHI (collectively, “use
or disclose PHI”) in order to fulfill Business Associate’s obligations under this
Agreement. DHCS and Business Associate are each a party to this Agreement and
are collectively referred to as the "parties.”
6. The terms used in this Agreement, but not otherwise defined, shall have the same
meanings as those terms in HIPAA and/or the IPA. Any reference to statutory or
regulatory language shall be to such language as in effect or as amended.
7. Permitted Uses and Disclosures of PHI by Business Associate. Except as
otherwise indicated in this Agreement, Business Associate may use or disclose PHI,
inclusive of de -identified data derived from such PHI, only to perform functions,
activities or services specified in this Agreement on behalf of DHCS, provided that
[[page 595]]
Exhibit G
Page 595 of 642
such use or disclosure would not violate HIPAA or other applicable laws if done by
DHCS.
7.1 Specific Use and Disclosure Provisions. Except as otherwise indicated in this
Agreement, Business Associate may use and disclose PHI if necessary for the
proper management and administration of the Business Associate or to carry out
the legal responsibilities of the Business Associate. Business Associate may
disclose PHI for this purpose if the disclosure is required by law, or the Business
Associate obtains reasonable assurances from the person to whom the
information is disclosed that i t will be held confidentially and used or further
disclosed only as required by law or for the purposes for which it was disclosed
to the person. The person notify the Business Associate of any instances of which
the person is aware that the confidentiality of the information has been breached,
unless such person is a treatment provider not acting as a business associate of
Business Associate.
8. Compliance with Other Applicable Law
To the extent that other State and/or federal laws provide additional,
stricter and/or more protective (collectively, more protective) privacy
and/or security protections to PHI or other confidential information
covered under this Agreement beyond those provided through HIPAA,
Business Associate agrees:
8.1.1 To comply with the more protective of the privacy and security
standards set forth in applicable State or federal laws to the extent such
standards provide a greater degree of protection and security than
HIPAA or are otherwise more favorable to the individuals whose
information is concerned; and
8.1.2 To treat any violation of such additional and/or more protective
standards as a breach or security incident, as appropriate, pursuant to
Section 18. of this Agreement.
8.2 Examples of laws that provide additional and/or stricter privacy protections to
certain types of PHI and/or confidential information, as defined in Section 4. of
this Agreement, include, but are not limited to the Information Practices Act,
California Civil Code sections 1798- 1798.78, Confidentiality of Alcohol and
Drug Abuse Patient Records, 42 CFR p art 2, W&I section 5328, and Health
and Safety Code section 11845.5.
8.3 If Business Associate is a Qualified Service Organization (QSO) as defined in
42 CFR section 2.11, Business Associate agrees to be bound by and comply
with subdivisions (2)(i) and (2)(ii) under the definition of QSO in 42 CFR section
2.11.
9. Additional Responsibilities of Business Associate
[[page 596]]
Exhibit G
Page 596 of 642
Nondisclosure. Business Associate not use or disclose PHI or other confidential
information other than as permitted or required by this Agreement or as required
by law.
9.1 Safeguards and Security.
9.1.1 Business Associate use safeguards that reasonably and appropriately
protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of PHI and other
confidential data and comply, where applicable, with subpart C of 45 CFR
part 164 with respect to electronic protected health information, to prevent
use or disclosure of the information other than as provided for by this
Agreement. Such safeguards be based on applicable Federal Information
Processing Standards (FIPS) Publication 199 protection levels.
9.1.2 Business Associate, at a minimum, utilize a National Institute of
Standards and Technology Special Publication (NIST SP) 800-53
compliant security framework when selecting and implementing its
security controls and maintain continuous compliance with NIST SP 800-
53 as it may be updated from time to time. The
current version of NIST
SP 800-53, Revision 5 i s available online; updates will be available online
at the NIST Computer Security Resource
Centerhttps://csrc.nist.gov/publications/sp800.
9.1.3 Business Associate employ FIPS 140-2 validated encryption of PHI at rest
and in motion unless Business Associate determines it is not reasonable
and appropriate to do so based upon a risk assessment, and equivalent
alternative measures are in place and doc umented as such. FIPS 140-2
validation can be determined online at the
NIST Cryptographic Module
Validation Program page, with information about the Cryptographic Module
Validation Program under FIPS 140-2 av ailable online. In addition,
Business Associate maintain, at a minimum, the most current industry
standards for transmission and storage of PHI and other confidential
information.
9.1.4 Business Associate apply security patches and upgrades, and keep virus
software up-to-date, on all systems on which PHI and other confidential
information may be used.
9.1.5 Business Associate ensure that all members of its workforce with access
to PHI and/or other confidential information sign a confidentiality statement
prior to access to such data. The statement be renewed annually.
9.1.6 Business Associate identify the security official who is responsible for the
development and implementation of the policies and procedures required
by 45 CFR part 164, subpart C.
[[page 597]]
Exhibit G
Page 597 of 642
9.2 Business Associate’s Agent. Business Associate ensure that any agents,
subcontractors, subawardees, vendors or others (collectively, “agents”) that use
or disclose PHI and/or confidential information on behalf of Business Associate
agree to the same restrictions and conditions that a pply to Business Associate
with respect to such PHI and/or confidential information.
10. Mitigation of Harmful Effects. Business Associate mitigate, to the extent practicable,
any harmful effect that is known to Business Associate of a use or disclosure of PHI
and other confidential information in violation of the requirements of this Agreement.
11. Access to PHI. Business Associate make PHI available in accordance with 45 CFR
section 164.524.
12. Amendment of PHI. Business Associate make PHI available for amendment and
incorporate any amendments to protected health information in accordance with 45
CFR section 164.526.
13. Accounting for Disclosures. Business Associate make available the information
required to provide an accounting of disclosures in accordance with 45 CFR section
164.528.
14. Compliance with DHCS Obligations. To the extent Business Associate is to carry
out an obligation of DHCS under 45 CFR p art 164, s ubpart E, comply with the
requirements of the subpart that apply to DHCS in the performance of such obligation.
15. Access to Practices, Books and Records. Business Associate make its internal
practices, books, and records relating to the use and disclosure of PHI on behalf of
DHCS available to DHCS upon reasonable request, and to the federal Secretary of
Health and Human Services for purposes of determining DHCS’ compliance with 45
CFR part 164, subpart E.
16. Return or Destroy PHI on Termination; Survival. At termination of this Agreement,
if feasible, Business Associate return or destroy all PHI and other confidential
information received from, or created or received by Business Associate on behalf of,
DHCS that Business Associate still maintains in any form and retain no copies of such
information. If return or destruction is not feasible, Business Associate notify DHCS of
the conditions that make the return or destruction infeasible, and DHCS and Business
Associate determine the terms and conditions under which Business Associate may
retain the PHI. If such return or destruction is not feasible, Business Associate extend
the protections of this Agreement to the information and limit further uses and
disclosures to those purposes that make the return or destruction of the information
infeasible.
17. Special Provision for SSA Data. If Business Associate receives data from or on
behalf of DHCS that was verified by or provided by the Social Security Administration
(SSA data) and is subject to an agreement between DHCS and SSA, Business
Associate provide, upon request by DHCS, a list of all employees and agents and
[[page 598]]
Exhibit G
Page 598 of 642
employees who have access to such data, including employees and agents of its
agents, to DHCS.
18. Breaches and Security Incidents. Business Associate implement reasonable
systems for the discovery and prompt reporting of any breach or security incident, and
take the following steps:
18.1 Notice to DHCS.
18.1.1 Business Associate notify DHCS immediately upon the discovery of a
suspected breach or security incident that involves SSA data. This
notification will be provided by email upon discovery of the breach. If
Business Associate is unable to provide notification by email, then
Business Associate provide notice by telephone to DHCS.
18.1.2 Business Associate notify DHCS within 24 hours by email (or by
telephone if Business Associate is unable to email DHCS) of the
discovery of the following, unless attributable to a treatment provider that
is not acting as a business associate of Business Associate:
18.1.2.1 Unsecured PHI if the PHI is reasonably believed to have been
accessed or acquired by an unauthorized person;
18.1.2.2 Any suspected security incident which risks unauthorized
access to PHI and/or other confidential information;
18.1.2.3 Any intrusion or unauthorized access, use or disclosure of PHI
in violation of this Agreement; or
18.1.2.4 Potential loss of confidential information affecting this
Agreement.
18.1.3 Notice be provided to the DHCS Program Contract Manager (as
applicable), the DHCS Privacy Office, and the DHCS Information
Security Office (collectively, “DHCS Contacts”) using the DHCS Contact
Information at Section 18.6. below.
Notice be made using the current DHCS “Privacy Incident Reporting
Form” (“PIR Form”; the initial notice of a security incident or breach that
is submitted is referred to as an “Initial PIR Form”) and include all
information known at the time the incident i s reported. The
Privacy
Incident Reporting Form i s available online.
Upon discovery of a breach or suspected security incident, intrusion or
unauthorized access, use or disclosure of PHI, Business Associate take:
18.1.3.1 Prompt action to mitigate any risks or damages involved with
the security incident or breach; and
[[page 599]]
Exhibit G
Page 599 of 642
18.1.3.2 Any action pertaining to such unauthorized disclosure required
by applicable federal and State law.
18.2 Investigation. Business Associate immediately investigate such security
incident or breach.
18.3 Complete Report. To provide a complete report of the investigation to the
DHCS contacts within ten (10) w orking days of the discovery of the security
incident or breach. This “Final PIR” include any applicable additional
information not included in the Initial Form. The Final PIR Form include an
assessment of all known factors relevant to a determination of whether a
breach occurred under HIPAA and other applicable federal and State laws. The
report also include a full, detailed corrective action plan, including its
implementation date and information on mitigation measures taken to halt
and/or contain the improper use or disclosure. If DHCS requests information in
addition to that requested through the PIR form, Business Associate make
reasonable efforts to provide DHCS with such information. A “Supplemental
PIR” may be used to submit revised or additional information after the Final PIR
is submitted. DHCS will review and approve or disapprove Business
Associate’s determination of whether a breach occur red, whether the security
incident or breach is reportable to the appropriate entities, if individual
notifications are required, and Business Associate’s corrective action plan.
18.3.1 If Business Associate does not complete a Final PIR within the ten
(10) working day timeframe, Business Associate request approval from DHCS
within the ten (10) working day timeframe of a new submission timeframe for
the Final PIR.
18.4 Notification of Individuals. If the cause of a breach is attributable to Business
Associate or its agents, other than when attributable to a treatment provider
that is not acting as a business associate of Business Associate, Business
Associate notify individuals accordingly and pay all costs of such notifications,
as well as all costs associated with the breach. The notifications comply with
applicable federal and State law. DHCS approve the time, manner and content
of any such notifications and their review and approval be obtained before the
notifications are made.
18.5 Responsibility for Reporting of Breaches to Entities Other than DHCS. If
the cause of a breach of PHI is attributable to Business Associate or its agents,
other than when attributable to a treatment provider that is not acting as a
business associate of Business Associate, Business Associate is responsible
for all required reporting of the breach as required by applicable federal and
State law.
18.6 DHCS Contact Information. To direct communications to the above
referenced DHCS staff, the Contractor initiate contact as indicated here.
DHCS reserves the right to make changes to the contact information below
[[page 600]]
Exhibit G
Page 600 of 642
by giving written notice to Business Associate. These changes shall not
require an amendment to this Agreement.
DHCS Program
Contract Manager
DHCS Privacy Office DHCS Information Security
Office
See the Scope of
Work exhibit for
Program Contract
Manager information.
If this Business
Associate Agreement
is not attached as an
exhibit to a contract,
contact the DHCS
signatory to this
Agreement.
Privacy Office
c/o: Office of HIPAA
Compliance
Department of Health Care
Services
P.O. Box 997413, MS 4722
Sacramento, CA 95899-7413
Email: incidents@dhcs.ca.gov
Telephone: (916) 445-4646
Information Security Office
DHCS Information Security
Office
P.O. Box 997413, MS 6400
Sacramento, CA 95899-7413
Email: incidents@dhcs.ca.gov
19. Responsibility of DHCS. DHCS agrees to not request the Business Associate to use
or disclose PHI in any manner that would not be permissible under HIPAA and/or other
applicable federal and/or State law.
20. Audits, Inspection and Enforcement
20.1 From time to time, DHCS may inspect the facilities, systems, books and records
of Business Associate to monitor compliance with this Agreement. Business
Associate promptly remedy any violation of this Agreement and certify the same
to the DHCS Privacy Officer in writing. Whether or how DHCS exercises this
provision shall not in any respect relieve Business Associate of its responsibility
to comply with this Agreement.
20.2 If Business Associate is the subject of an audit, compliance review, investigation
or any proceeding that is related to the performance of its obligations pursuant
to this Agreement, or is the subject of any judicial or administrative proceeding
alleging a violation of HIPAA, Business Associate promptly notify DHCS unless
it is legally prohibited from doing so.
21. Termination
21.1 Termination for Cause . Upon DHCS’ knowledge of a violation of this
Agreement by Business Associate, DHCS may in its discretion:
[[page 601]]
Exhibit G
Page 601 of 642
21.1.1 Provide an opportunity for Business Associate to cure the violation and
terminate this Agreement if Business Associate does not do so within
the time specified by DHCS; or
21.1.2 Terminate this Agreement if Business Associate has violated a material
term of this Agreement.
21.2 Judicial or Administrative Proceedings. DHCS may terminate this
Agreement if Business Associate is found to have violated HIPAA, or stipulates
or consents to any such conclusion, in any judicial or administrative proceeding.
22. Miscellaneous Provisions
22.1 Disclaimer. DHCS makes no warranty or representation that compliance by
Business Associate with this Agreement will satisfy Business Associate’s
business needs or compliance obligations. Business Associate is solely
responsible for all decisions made by Business Associate regarding the
safeguarding of PHI and other confidential information.
22.2. Amendment.
22.2.1 Any provision of this Agreement which is in conflict with current or future
applicable federal or State laws is hereby amended to conform to the
provisions of those laws. Such amendment of this Agreement shall be
effective on the effective date of the laws necessitating it, and shall be
binding on the parties even though such amendment may not have been
reduced to writing and formally agreed upon and executed by the parties.
22.2.2 Failure by Business Associate to take necessary actions required by
amendments to this Agreement under Section 22.2.1 shall constitute a
material violation of this Agreement.
22.3 Assistance in Litigation or Administrative Proceedings . Business
Associate make itself and its employees and agents available to DHCS at no
cost to DHCS to testify as witnesses, or otherwise, in the event of litigation or
administrative proceedings being commenced against DHCS, its directors,
officers and/or employees based upon claimed violation of HIPAA, which
involve inactions or actions by the Business Associate.
22.4 No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Agreement is intended to or shall
confer, upon any third person any rights or remedies whatsoever.
22.5 Interpretation. The terms and conditions in this Agreement shall be interpreted
as broadly as necessary to implement and comply with HIPAA and other
applicable laws.
22.6 No Waiver of Obligations. No change, waiver or discharge of any liability or
obligation hereunder on any one or more occasions shall be deemed a waiver
[[page 602]]
Exhibit G
Page 602 of 642
of performance of any continuing or other obligation, or shall prohibit
enforcement of any obligation, on any other occasion.
[[page 603]]
Exhibit H
Page 603 of 642
Exhibit H – Conflict of Interest Avoidance Requirements
1.0 The Department of Health Care Services (DHCS) requires Contractor to avoid
conflicts of interest or the appearance of conflicts of interest. DHCS reserves the
right to determine, in DHCS’ sole discretion, whether any information received
from any source indicates the existence of a potential, suspected, and/or actual
conflict of interest.
[[page 604]]
Exhibit H
Page 604 of 642
Exhibit H
1.0 Conflict of Interest Avoidance Requirements
1.1.1 Introduction
1.1.2 Identification of Ownership, Contractual, and Financial Interests
1.1.3 Conflicts of Interest
1.1.4 DHCS Approval of Conflict Avoidance Plan
1.1.5 Third-Party Monitor Oversight
1.1.6 DHCS’ Right of Termination
1.1.7 Notice of Conflict of Interest to DHCS
[[page 605]]
Exhibit H
Page 605 of 642
1.0 Conflict of Interest Avoidance Requirements
1.1.1 Introduction
Contractor must ensure that it complies with the conflict of interest avoidance
requirements set forth in this Exhibit H and must also ensure the compliance of
its employees, officers, and directors throughout the entire term of the Contract,
and any extensions thereto. Contractor must also ensure that its Subcontractors
and Downstream Subcontractors (as those terms are defined in the Contract),
and the employees, officers and directors of Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors, comply with the requirements set forth in this Exhibit H
throughout the entire term of the Contract, and any extension thereto.
1.1.2 Identification of Ownership, Contractual, and Financial Interests
Contractor will disclose the following to DHCS, in a form and manner directed by
DHCS through All Plan Letter (APL) or other similar instructions:
A. Any form of ownership interest, affiliation, financial interest, contractual
relationship, and/or control Contractor has in any corporation or other
entity that operates as a Medi-Cal managed care health plan, Prepaid
Inpatient Health Plan (PIHP), Prepaid Ambulatory Health Plan (PAHP),
Primary Care Case Management (PCCM), pharmaceutical company or
any other health care provider, fiscal intermediary, billing agent, or any
other controlling agent for Medi-Cal services (“Medi-Cal Program
Participant”); and
B. Any form of ownership interest, affiliation, financial interest, contractual
relationship, and/or control Contractor has in any corporation, partnership,
limited partnership, limited liability company, sole proprietorship, or any
other legal entity that is not a Medi-Cal Program Participant.
To the extent any interest identified by Contractor in Section 1.2 results in a
potential, suspected, and/or actual conflict of interest, Contractor will be subject
to all requirements of this Exhibit H.
1.1.3 Conflicts of Interest
If Contractor has a potential, suspected, and/or actual conflict of interest,
Contractor must provide a description of the relationship and a conflict avoidance
plan to ensure that such a relationship will not adversely affect DHCS, other
Medi-Cal managed care plans, and/or Medi-Cal Members. In the conflict
avoidance plan, Contractor must also establish procedures to avoid, neutralize,
and/or mitigate a potential, suspected, and/or actual conflict of interest.
[[page 606]]
Exhibit H
Page 606 of 642
Any of the following instances would be considered a potential, suspected,
and/or actual conflict of interest, including but not limited to any of these
instances in the past, present, or future:
A. An instance where Contractor or any of its Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors, or any employee, officer, or director of
Contractor or any of its Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors,
has an interest, financial or otherwise, whereby the use or disclosure of
information obtained while performing services under the Contract would
allow for private or personal benefit or for any purpose that is inconsistent
with the goals and objectives of the Contract;
B. An instance where Contractor or any of its Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors, or any employee, officer, or director of
Contractor or any of its Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors,
improperly uses their positions for purposes that are, or give the
appearance of being, for private gain for themselves or others, such as
those with whom they have family, business, or other ties that are
determined by DHCS to be a conflict of interest;
C. An instance where Contractor or any of its Subcontractors and
Downstream Subcontractors, or any employee, officer, or director of
Contractor or any of its Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors,
gains an unfair competitive advantage due to its unequal access to
information, such as where non-public information gained on one contract
by Contractor may be leveraged in bidding for another government
contract;
1) Where pursuant to the Political Reform Act (Govt. Code (GC) §§
87100–87500), a DHCS official has an economic Interest in
Contractor and the official makes, participates in the making of, or
uses his or her official position to influence the making of a decision
involving Contractor where it is reasonably foreseeable that the
decision could materially affect the official’s economic interest;
2) Where pursuant to GC section 1090 et seq., a DHCS official
participates in the making of a Contract with Contractor and the
official is financially interested in the Contract;
3) Where in contravention of Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I)
section 14479, a DHCS officer or employee is employed in a
management or consultant position by Contractor, Subcontractor,
or Downstream Subcontractor one year after the DHCS officer or
employee terminates their State employment; and
[[page 607]]
Exhibit H
Page 607 of 642
4) For Two-Plan managed care models, an instance where Contractor
will be contracted, affiliated, or otherwise entered into a partnership
arrangement to serve as a Local Initiative in the same Two-Plan
county where Contractor is operating as the commercial plan, or
has indicated an intent to do so.
D. Conflict Avoidance Plan Framework
The requirements of a conflict avoidance plan will vary depending on the
nature of the conflict, but must include, at a minimum, the following
elements:
1) Clear definitions;
2) Statement of organizational commitment to develop and follow the
conflict avoidance plan;
3) Description of the type of conflict of interest (e.g., unequal access
to information, impaired objectivity, and/or biased ground rules
implicated by a contract);
4) Description of the factors that may or do place Contractor in a
potential, suspected, and/or actual conflict of interest situation;
5) If applicable, identification of Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors with potential, suspected, and/or actual conflict of
interest;
6) Detailed plans for avoiding, neutralizing, and/or mitigating conflicts
of interest, or, if not feasible, an explanation and justification for
accepting conflicts of interest;
7) Administrative, technical, physical, and management controls, as
required in the context of the specific conflict of interest;
8) Provision for third-party monitoring and a requirement that the third-
party monitor certify Contractor’s compliance with the conflict
avoidance plan, if required by DHCS;
9) Contractor’s certification of compliance with the conflict avoidance
plan; and
10) Provisions requiring periodic review and amendment by Contractor
of the conflict avoidance plan to address material changes impacting
the conflict of interest.
[[page 608]]
Exhibit H
Page 608 of 642
1.1.4 DHCS Approval of Conflict Avoidance Plan
DHCS, in its sole discretion, will determine whether the specific provisions of the
conflict avoidance plan satisfactorily address the actual, suspected, or potential
conflicts of interest. DHCS, in its sole discretion, may impose additional
requirements or require modification to the conflict avoidance plan, which may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Termination of contractual obligations that in DHCS’ determination create
actual or potential conflicts of interest;
B. Removal of Contractor’s management or staff who DHCS determines
were involved in the relationship creating the conflict of interest; and/or
C. Creation of an “ethical firewall,” with measures to ensure that no
information passes between individuals/entities within Contractor’s
organization that were involved in the conflict and those individuals/entities
not involved in the conflict.
These requirements will vary, depending on the nature of the potential,
suspected, and/or actual conflicts of interest, the manner in which those
potential, suspected, and/or actual conflicts of interest impact the Contract, and
DHCS’ determination of the best method for addressing those conflicts of
interest.
1.1.5 Third-Party Monitor Oversight
DHCS may, in its sole discretion, appoint a third-party monitor to assist in
overseeing Contractor’s compliance with the conflict avoidance plan. The third-
party monitor’s responsibilities will include monitoring, reporting, consulting, and,
where necessary, investigation of compliance concerns. Appropriate provisions
regarding the third-party monitor’s duties and Contractor’s obligations in
connection with the third-party monitor will be included in the conflict avoidance
plan.
1.1.6 DHCS’ Right of Termination
If DHCS is aware or becomes aware of a potential, suspected, and/or actual
conflict of interest, Contractor will be given an opportunity to submit additional
information to resolve the conflict of interest. If Contractor has a potential,
suspected, and/or actual conflict of interest, Contractor will have five Working
Days from the date of notification by DHCS of the potential, suspected, and/or
actual conflict of interest to provide complete information regarding the conflict of
interest. If DHCS determines that an actual conflict of interest exists and the
conflict cannot be resolved or mitigated to the satisfaction of DHCS, the conflict
of interest will be grounds for termination of the Contract by DHCS for cause.
[[page 609]]
Exhibit H
Page 609 of 642
1.1.7 Notice of Conflict of Interest to DHCS
Contractor, and each of its Subcontractors and Downstream Subcontractors,
must notify their DHCS Contract Manager within ten Working Days of when they
become aware of any potential, suspected, or actual conflict of interest, or when
any change occurs to the information provided to DHCS previously, whether
provided previously through the Request for Procurement or previous notice
given during the term of the Contract. This notice will be in a form and manner as
directed by DHCS through APL or other similar instructions.
[[page 610]]
Exhibit I
Page 610 of 642
Exhibit I – Contractor’s Parent Guaranty Requirements
1.0 Contractor’s Parent Guaranty Requirements
If Contractor is a subsidiary of a corporation or other legal entity, the full and
prompt performance of all covenants, provisions, and agreements resulting from
this Contract for the life of the Contract must be guaranteed by that entity in
Contractor’s chain of ownership, which is publicly traded (the “Guaranty”). This
entity will be known as Contractor’s “parent corporation” for purposes of the
Contract (the “Guarantor”).
[[page 611]]
Exhibit I
Page 611 of 642
1.1 Contractor’s Parent Guaranty Requirements
1.1.1 Minimum Requirements
1.1.2 Provisions
1.1.3 Terms
[[page 612]]
Exhibit I
Page 612 of 642
1.0 Contractor’s Parent Guaranty Requirements
1.1.1 Minimum Requirements
The Guaranty must, at a minimum, meet the following requirements. It must:
A. Be made to DHCS, in writing, by the Contract effective date;
B. Be signed by an official authorized to bind the Guarantor organization;
C. Accept unconditional responsibility for all performance and financial
requirements and obligations of the Contract including, but not limited to,
maintenance of Tangible Net Equity (TNE) and payment of liquidated
damages;
D. Recite that “for good and valuable consideration, receipt of which is
hereby acknowledged,” Guarantor is making the Guaranty;
E. State that Guarantor stipulates that if the Contract is ultimately awarded to
the subsidiary, that DHCS will so award in reliance upon the Guaranty;
F. State that the undersigned corporate officer warrants that they have
personally reviewed all pertinent corporate documents, including but not
limited to, articles of incorporation, bylaws, and agreements between the
parent and subsidiary; and
G. State that the undersigned corporate officer warrants that nothing in these
documents in any way limits the capacity of the parent to enter into this
Guaranty
1.1.2 Provisions
The Guaranty must include the following provisions:
A. DHCS need not take any action against Contractor, any other guarantor,
or any other person, firm or corporation, or resort to any security held by
Contractor at any time before proceeding against Guarantor;
B. Guarantor hereby waives any and all notices and demands which may be
required to be given by any other statute or rule of law and agrees that its
liability hereunder will be in no way affected, diminished, or released by
any extension of time, forbearance, or waiver, which may be granted to
Contractor, its successor or assignee;
C. This Guaranty will extend to and include all future amendments,
modifications, and extensions of the Contract and all future supplemental
[[page 613]]
Exhibit I
Page 613 of 642
and other agreements with respect to matters covered by the Contract that
DHCS and Contractor may enter into, with or without notice to or
knowledge of Guarantor, but Guarantor will have the benefit of any such
extension, forbearance, waiver, amendment, modification, or
supplemental or other agreement. It is the purpose and intent of the
parties hereto that the obligations of Guarantor hereunder will be co-
extensive with, but not in excess of, the obligations of Contractor, its
successor or assignee, under the Contract; and
D. Guarantor agrees that the Guaranty will continue in full force and effect
despite any change in the legal or corporate status of the subsidiary,
including, but not limited to, its sale, reorganization, dissolution or
bankruptcy.
1.1.3 Terms
The Guaranty must be presented in terms, which DHCS in its sole discretion,
determines, as a whole, adequately establish Contractor’s financial responsibility.
[[page 614]]
Exhibit J
Page 614 of 642
Exhibit J: Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan
This Exhibit contains instructions and templates for Contractor to make submissions to DHCS per the requirements set
forth in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.3 (Contractor’s Duty to Disclose All Delegated Relationships and to
Submit Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan). As with all Exhibits to the Contract, Exhibit J is a part of this Contract
and the reporting requirements in this Exhibit J and the use of the prescribed template are binding and enforceable
contractual obligations under this Contract. Contractor must complete Exhibit J for each county in which they operate.
Template A: Delegation Function Matrix
Instructions: Complete Table A1: Delegation Function Matrix – For Subcontractor for all functions that are delegated
through applicable Subcontractor Agreements. Contractor may not delegate contractual duties and obligations where
delegation is legally or contractually prohibited. Use additional pages of Table A1 as needed – additional pages will not be
counted in the total page count for the Delegation Justification and Plan.
Contractor Name:
Applicable County:
Compliance Officer:
Compliance Contact Information:
1. Subcontractor Name: Name of the Subcontractor with whom Contractor has a Subcontractor Agreement
2. Type of Subcontractor: Fully Delegated Subcontractor, Partially Delegated Subcontractor, Administrative
Subcontractor
3. Delegated Function(s): The function(s) Contractor is delegating to Subcontractor. In the case of a Fully Delegated
Subcontractor, this may be “all delegable functions.”
4. Address: The address for location of the performance of Subcontractor’s functions
[[page 615]]
Exhibit J
Page 615 of 642
5. Contact Info: Name and contact information for each of Subcontractor’s key personnel who is responsible for
ensuring compliance.
6. Medi-Cal Managed Care Member: Percentage of the total Medi-Cal Members assigned to the Subcontractor if
applicable.
7. Proportion of Capitated Rates At Risk: Proportion of total capitated rates for which the Subcontractor is at risk, if
applicable.
[[page 616]]
Exhibit J
Page 616 of 642
Table A1: Delegation Function Matrix—For Subcontractors
Sub-
contractor
Name
(1)
Type of
Sub-
Contractor
(2)
Delegated
Function(s)
(3)
Address
(4)
Contact Info
(5)
Percentage
of Total
Members
(6)
Proportion
of Total
Capitated
Rate
(7)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
Sub- contractor Name (1)
Type of Sub- Contractor
(2)
Delegated Function(s) (3) Address (4) Contact Info (5) Percentage of Total
Members (6)
Proportion of Total Capitated
Rate (7)
[[page 617]]
Exhibit J
Page 617 of 642
Instructions: Complete Table A2 Delegation Function Matrix—Downstream Subcontractors for all functions that are
delegated through applicable Downstream Subcontractor Agreements. Use additional pages of Table A2 as needed.
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor may not delegate contractual duties and obligations where delegation is
legally or contractually prohibited. Complete one for each Subcontractor that delegates functions downstream and, as
applicable, for each Downstream Subcontractor, if they further delegate functions downstream. Use additional pages of
Table A2 as needed – additional pages will not be counted in the total page count for the Delegation Justification and
Plan.
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractors Name:
Applicable County(ies):
Compliance Officer:
Compliance Contact Information:
1. Downstream Subcontractor Name: Name of the Downstream Subcontractor with whom the Subcontractor has a
Downstream Subcontractor Agreement; or the name of the Downstream Subcontractor with whom the
Subcontractor’s Downstream Subcontractor further delegates functions downstream
2. Type of Downstream Subcontractor: Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor, Downstream Partially
Delegated Subcontractor, Downstream Administrative Subcontractor
3. Delegated Function(s): The function(s) Subcontractor is delegating to Downstream Subcontractor; in the case of
a Downstream Fully Delegated Subcontractor, this may be “all delegable functions.”
4. Address: The address of the location of the performance of the Downstream Subcontractor’s functions.
5. Contact Info: Name and contact information for each of the Downstream Subcontractor’s key personnel who is
responsible for ensuring compliance.
6. Medi-Cal Managed Care Member: Percentage of the total Medi-Cal Members assigned to the Downstream
Subcontractor, if applicable.
7. Proportion of Capitated Rates At Risk: Proportion of total capitated rates for which the Downstream
Subcontractor, is at risk, if applicable.
[[page 618]]
Exhibit J
Page 618 of 642
Table A2: Delegation Function Matrix—For Downstream Subcontractors
Downstream
Subcontractor
Name
(1)
Type
(2)
Delegated
Function(s)
(3)
Address
(4)
Contact Info
(5)
Percentage
of Total
Members
(6)
Proportion
of Total
Capitated
Rate
(7)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)
[[page 619]]
Exhibit J
Page 619 of 642
Template B: Delegation Justification and Plan
Instructions: Complete this template for each Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor. Contractor may not delegate
for those contractual duties and obligations where delegation is legally or contractually prohibited. Responses must be
limited to no more than ten pages.
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor Name:
Applicable County(ies):
Subcontractor or Downstream Key Personnel:
Subcontractor Key Personnel Contact Information:
Type of Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor: Fully delegated, Partially delegated, Administrative,
Downstream Fully delegated, Downstream Partially delegated, Downstream Administrative:
a) Justification of Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement: Describe the purpose and
the justification of the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream Subcontractor Agreement.
b) Pre-Existing Relationships: Describe any pre-existing relationship, including any affiliation, parent entity, or prior
existing contract between Contractor and Subcontractor, or Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor including
the duration of such pre-existing relationship.
c) Sub-Delegation: Indicate if Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor is permitted to sub-delegate any functions. If
so, describe how Contractor will maintain oversight over delegated functions to Subcontractors and Downstream
Subcontractors. Provide citations to provisions in the Subcontractor Agreement and Downstream Subcontractor
Agreement to support Contractor’s assertions.
d) Impact on Contractor: Describe the impact and benefit, if any, the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream
Subcontractor Agreement will have on Contractor’s operations, administrative capacity, and financial viability.
[[page 620]]
Exhibit J
Page 620 of 642
e) Contractor’s Administrative Capacity to Oversee and Monitor Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor:
Describe Contractor’s administrative capacity to oversee and monitor Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor
as applicable
f) Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s Administrative Capacity: Describe Subcontractor’s and
Downstream Subcontractor’s administrative capacity to perform each delegated function, including but not limited to
Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractor’s capacity to perform quality monitoring and community engagement,
if applicable.
g) Subcontractor’s and Downstream Subcontractors’ Compliance with Applicable Contractual Provisions: Detail
how the Subcontractor Agreement and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement complies with, and ensures
compliance, with all provisions of the Contract applicable to the delegated functions, including appropriate citations to
the provisions in the Subcontractor Agreement and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement. Please complete Template
C (Contract Requirements Grid) in Exhibit J to indicate which provisions are included in the Subcontractor Agreements
and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, as applicable for each Agreement.
h) Contractor’s Oversight Policy and Procedures: Describe how Contractor will inform Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractors of Contractor’s oversight policies and procedures.
i) Financial Arrangement: Contractor must include description of any financial arrangements it has with Subcontractor
and Downstream Subcontractor.
j) Other Information: Include any other information that would assist DHCS in its review of Contractor’s delegated
structure.
k) Previously Approved Documents: (Applicable to annual submissions only) If Contractor has previously
submitted documentation to DHCS in connection with the Subcontractor Agreement or Downstream Subcontractor
Agreement, either through the Request for Proposal (RFP) process or during the term of this Contract, Contractor
must provide any such documentation.
[[page 621]]
Exhibit J
Page 621 of 642
Template C: Contract Requirements Grid
Instructions: If you delegate any functions, complete this template for those contractual duties. One Template C should
be submitted showing all delegated functions to accompany Templates A and B.
Contractors must complete this table to indicate all the contract requirements that are applicable to their Subcontractors or
Downstream Subcontractor, depending on the functions that are delegated to the respective entities.
This table also references obligations of Contractor where delegation must be contractually prohibited. While Contractor
must not delegate contractual duties and obligations where delegation is contractually prohibited, Contractor or
Subcontractor or Downstream Subcontractor may include related contractual requirements in their Agreements. For
example, while Contractor may not delegate the functions of a Compliance Program, they may require Subcontractor and
Downstream Subcontractors to maintain their own compliance programs. Regardless of Contractor’s system of
delegation, Contractor remains obligated to ensure performance of all duties and obligations under the Contract.
Fully Delegated Subcontractors must comply with all contractual requirements. Partially Delegated Subcontractors and
Downstream Partially Delegated Subcontractors, and Administrative Subcontractors and Downstream Administrative
Subcontractors must at minimum comply with requirements outlined in Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.1.5.B
(Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Agreement Requirements).
Additional requirements may apply depending on the nature of the function or functions delegated. For example, if a
Subcontractor delegates claims processing to an Administrative Downstream Subcontractor for this function, the
Administrative Downstream Subcontractor must comply with Exhibit A, Attachment III, Subsection 3.3.5 (Claims
Processing) for all requirements related to timely processing of claims.
Delegating functions or including contractual provisions in Subcontractor Agreements or Downstream Subcontractor
Agreements does not absolve Contractor of ensuring compliance of the Subcontractors or Downstream Subcontractors.
Note:
(1) Must not be delegated: These rows reference contractual requirements associated with functions for which
delegation is contractually prohibited. While Contractor must not delegate contractual duties and obligations where
delegation is legally or contractually prohibited, Contractor may include related contractual requirements in the
[[page 622]]
Exhibit J
Page 622 of 642
Subcontractor Agreements. For example, while Contractor may not delegate the functions of a Compliance Program, they
may require Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractors to maintain their own compliance programs.
[[page 623]]
Exhibit J
Page 623 of 642
Contractor Name:
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
1.0 Organization
1.1 Plan Organization and Administration
1.1.1 Legal Capacity
1.1.2 Key Personnel Disclosure Form
1.1.3 Conflict of Interest – Current and Former State Employees
1.1.4 Contract Performance
1.1.5 Medical Decisions
1.1.6 Medical Director
1.1.7 Chief Health Equity Officer (1) Must not be delegated
1.1.8 Key Personnel Changes
1.1.9 Administrative Duties/Responsibilities
1.1.10 Member Representation
1.1.11 Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Training
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
1.2 Financial Information
1.2.1 Financial Viability and Standards Compliance
1.2.2 Contractor’s Financial Reporting Obligations
1.2.3 Independent Financial Audit Reports
1.2.4 Cooperation with DHCS’ Financial Audits
1.2.5 Medical Loss Ratio (1) Must not be delegated
1.2.6 Contractor’s Obligations
1.2.7 Community Reinvestment Plan and Report
[[page 624]]
Exhibit J
Page 624 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
1.3 Program Integrity and Compliance Program
1.3.1 Compliance Program (1) Must not be delegated
1.3.2 Fraud Prevention Program
1.3.3 Provider Screening, Enrolling, and Credentialing/Recredentialing
1.3.4 Contractor’s Obligations Regarding Suspended, Excluded, and
Ineligible Providers
1.3.5 Disclosures
1.3.6 Treatment of Overpayment Recoveries
1.3.7 Federal False Claims Act Compliance and Support
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
2.0 Systems and Processes
2.1 Management Information System
2.1.1 Management Information System Capability
2.1.2 Encounter Data Reporting
2.1.3 Participation in the State Drug Rebate Program
2.1.4 Network Provider Data Reporting
2.1.5 Program Data Reporting
2.1.6 Template Data Reporting
2.1.7 Management Information System/Data Audits
2.1.8 Management Information System/Data Correspondence
2.1.9. Tracking and Submitting Alternative Format Selections
2.1.10 Interoperability Application Programming Information System
Requirements
[[page 625]]
Exhibit J
Page 625 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
2.2 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program
2.2.1 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program
Overview
2.2.2 Governing Board
2.2.3 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Committee
2.2.4 Provider Participation
2.2.5 Subcontractor and Downstream Subcontractor Quality Improvement
Activities
2.2.6 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Transformation Program
Policies and Procedures
2.2.7 Quality Improvement and Health Equity Annual Plan
2.2.8 National Committee for Quality Assurance Accreditation (1) Must not be delegated
2.2.9 External Quality Review Requirements
2.2.10 Quality Care for Children
2.2.11 Skilled Nursing Facilities—Long-Term Care
2.2.12 Disease Surveillance
2.2.13 Credentialing and Recredentialing
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
2.3 Utilization Management Program
2.3.1 Prior Authorizations and Review Procedures
2.3.2 Timeframes for Medical Authorization
2.3.3 Review of Utilization Data
2.3.4 Delegating Utilization Management Activities
[[page 626]]
Exhibit J
Page 626 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
3.0 Provider, Network Providers, Subcontractors, and Downstream
Subcontractors
3.1 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements,
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements, and Contractor’s
Oversight Duties
3.1.1 Overview of Contractor’s Duties and Obligations
3.1.2 DHCS Approval of Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
3.1.3 Contractor’s Duty to Disclose All Delegated Relationships and to
Submit Delegation Reporting and Compliance Plan
3.1.4 Contractor’s Duty to Ensure Subcontractor, Downstream
Subcontractor, and Network Provider Compliance
(1) Must not be delegated
3.1.5 Requirements for Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor
Agreements, and Downstream Subcontractor Agreements
3.1.6 Financial Viability of Subcontractors, Downstream Subcontractors, and
Network Providers
3.1.7 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Federally Qualified
Health Centers and Rural Health Clinics
3.1.8 Network Provider Agreements with Safety-Net Providers
3.1.9 Network Provider Agreements, Subcontractor Agreements, and
Downstream Subcontractor Agreements with Local Health
Departments
3.1.10 Nondiscrimination in Provider Contracts
3.1.11 Public Records
3.1.12 Requirement to Post
[[page 627]]
Exhibit J
Page 627 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
3.2 Provider Relations
3.2.1 Exclusivity
3.2.2 Provider Dispute Resolution Mechanism
3.2.3 Out-of-Network Provider Relations
3.2.4 Contractor’s Provider Manual
3.2.5 Network Provider Training
3.2.6 Emergency Department Protocols
3.2.7 Prohibited Punitive Action Against the Provider
3.2.8 Submittal of Inpatient Days Information
[[page 628]]
Exhibit J
Page 628 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
3.3 Provider Compensation Arrangements
3.3.1 Compensation and Value Based Arrangements
3.3.2 Capitation Arrangements
3.3.3 Provider Financial Incentive Program Payments
3.3.4 Identification of Responsible Payor
3.3.5 Claims Processing
3.3.6 Prohibited Claims
3.3.7 Federally Qualified Health Center, Rural Health Center, and Indian
Health Care Provider
3.3.8 Non-Contracting Certified Nurse Midwife, Nurse Practitioner, and
Licensed Midwife Providers
3.3.9 Non-Contracting Family Planning Providers
3.3.10 Sexually Transmitted Disease
3.3.11 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Testing and Counseling
3.3.12 Immunizations
3.3.13 Community Based Adult Services
3.3.14 Organ and Bone Marrow Transplants
3.3.15 Long-Term Care Services
3.3.16 Emergency Services and Post-Stabilization Care Services
3.3.17 Provider-Preventable Conditions
3.3.18 Prohibition Against Payment to Excluded Providers
3.3.19 Compliance with Directed Payment Initiatives and Related
Reimbursement Requirements
[[page 629]]
Exhibit J
Page 629 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
4.0 Member
4.1 Marketing
4.1.1 Training and Certification of Marketing Representatives
4.1.2 Marketing Plan
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
4.2 Enrollments and Disenrollments
4.2.1 Enrollment
4.2.2 Disenrollment
[[page 630]]
Exhibit J
Page 630 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
4.3 Population Health Management and Coordination of Care
4.3.1 Population Health Management Program Requirements
4.3.2 Population Needs Assessment
4.3.3 Data Integration and Exchange
4.3.4 Medi-Cal Connect (DHCS’ PHM Service)
4.3.5 Population Risk Stratification and Segmentation, and Risk Tiering
4.3.6 Screening and Assessments
4.3.7 Care Management Programs
4.3.8 Basic Population Health Management
4.3.9 Other Population Health Requirements for Children
4.3.10 Transitional Care Services
4.3.11 Targeted Case Management Services
4.3.12 Mental Health Services
4.3.13 Alcohol and Substance Use Disorder Treatment Services
4.3.14 California Children’s Services
4.3.15 Services for Persons with Developmental Disabilities
4.3.16 School-Based Services
4.3.17 Dental
4.3.18 Direct Observed Therapy for Treatment of Tuberculosis
4.3.19 Women, Infants, and Children Supplemental Nutrition Program
4.3.20 Home and Community-Based Services Programs
4.3.21 In-Home Supportive Services
4.3.22 Indian Health Care Providers
4.3.23 Justice Involved Reentry Coordination
4.3.24 Managed Care Liaisons
[[page 631]]
Exhibit J
Page 631 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
4.4 Enhanced Care Management
4.4.1 Contractor’s Responsibilities for Administration of Enhanced Care
Management
4.4.2 Populations of Focus for Enhanced Care Management
4.4.3 Enhanced Care Management Providers
4.4.4 Enhanced Care Management Provider Capacity
4.4.5 Enhanced Care Management Model of Care
4.4.6 Member Identification for Enhanced Care Management
4.4.7 Authorizing Members for Enhanced Care Management
4.4.8 Assignment to an Enhanced Care Management Provider
4.4.9 Initiating Delivery of Enhanced Care Management
4.4.10 Discontinuation of Enhanced Care Management
4.4.11 Core Service Components of Enhanced Care Management
4.4.12 Data System Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Enhanced
Care Management
4.4.13 Oversight of Enhanced Care Management Providers
4.4.14 Payment of Enhanced Care Management Providers
4.4.15 Enhanced Care Management Reporting Requirements
4.4.16 Enhanced Care Management Quality and Performance Incentive
Program
[[page 632]]
Exhibit J
Page 632 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
4.5 Community Supports
4.5.1 Contractor’s Responsibility for Administration of Community Supports
4.5.2 DHCS Pre-Approved Community Supports
4.5.3 Community Supports Providers
4.5.4 Community Supports Provider Capacity
4.5.5 Community Supports Model of Care
4.5.6 Identifying Members for Community Supports
4.5.7 Authorizing Members for Community Supports and Communication of
Authorization Status
4.5.8 Referring Members to Community Supports Providers for Community
Supports
4.5.9 Data System Requirements and Data Sharing to Support Community
Supports
4.5.10 Contractor’s Oversight of Community Supports Providers
4.5.11 Delegation of Community Supports Administration to Network
Providers, Subcontractors, or Downstream Subcontractors
4.5.12 Payment of Community Supports Providers
4.5.13 Community Supports Reporting Requirements
4.5.14 Community Supports Quality and Performance Incentive Program
[[page 633]]
Exhibit J
Page 633 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
4.6 Member Grievance and Appeal System
4.6.1 Grievance and Appeal Program Requirements
4.6.2 Grievance Process
4.6.3 Discrimination Grievances
4.6.4 Notice of Action
4.6.5 Appeal Process
4.6.6 Responsibilities in Expedited Appeals
4.6.7 State Hearings and Independent Medical Reviews
4.6.8 Continuation of Services Until Appeal and State Hearing Rights Are
Exhausted
4.6.9 Grievance and Appeal Reporting and Data
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
5.0 Services – Scope and Delivery
5.1 Member Services
5.1.1 Members Rights and Responsibilities
5.1.2 Member Services Staff
5.1.3 Member Information
5.1.4 Primary Care Provider Selection
5.1.5 Notices of Action for Denial, Deferral, or Modification of Prior
Authorization Requests
[[page 634]]
Exhibit J
Page 634 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
5.2 Network and Access to Care
5.2.1 Access to Network Providers and Covered Services
5.2.2 Network Capacity
5.2.3 Network Composition
5.2.4 Network Ratios
5.2.5 Network Adequacy Standards
5.2.6 Access to Emergency Service Providers and Emergency Services
5.2.7 Out-of-Network Access
5.2.8 Specific Requirements for Access to Programs and Covered Services
5.2.9 Network and Access Changes to Covered Services
5.2.10 Access Rights
5.2.11 Cultural and Linguistic Programs and Committees
5.2.12 Continuity of Care for Seniors and Persons with Disabilities
5.2.13 Network Reports
5.2.14 Site Review
5.2.15 Street Medicine
[[page 635]]
Exhibit J
Page 635 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
5.3 Scope of Services
5.3.1 Covered Services
5.3.2 Medically Necessary Services
5.3.3 Initial Health Appointment
5.3.4 Services for Members Less Than 21 Years of Age
5.3.5 Services for Adults
5.3.6 Pregnant and Postpartum Members
5.3.7 Services for All Members
5.3.8 Investigational Services
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
5.4 Community Based Adult Services
5.4.1 Covered Services
5.4.2 Coordination of Care
5.4.3 Required Reports for the Community Based Adult Services Program
5.4.4 Community Participation
5.4.5 Community Based Adult Services Program Integrity
[[page 636]]
Exhibit J
Page 636 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
5.5 Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Benefits
5.5.1 Mental Health Parity Requirements
5.5.2 Non-specialty Mental Health Services and Substance Use Disorder
Services
5.5.3 Non-specialty Mental Health Services Providers
5.5.4 Emergency Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services
5.5.5 Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Services Disputes
5.5.6 No Wrong Door for Mental Health Services
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
5.6 MOUs with Local Government Agencies, County Programs, and
Third Parties
5.6.1 MOU Purpose
5.6.2 MOU Requirements
5.6.3 MOU Oversight and Compliance
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
6.0 Emergency Preparedness and Response
6.1 General Guidance
6.2 Business Continuity Emergency Plan
6.3 Member Emergency Preparedness Plan
6.4 California’s Standardized Emergency Management System
6.5 Reporting Requirements During an Emergency
6.6 DHCS Emergency Directives
[[page 637]]
Exhibit J
Page 637 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit A, Attachment III
7.0 Operations Deliverables and Requirements
[[page 638]]
Exhibit J
Page 638 of 642
Contractual Requirements Delegated to Subcontractor
Exhibit E
1.0 Program Terms and Conditions
1.1.1 Governing Law
1.1.2 DHCS Guidance
1.1.3 Contract Interpretation
1.1.4 Assignments, Mergers, Acquisitions
1.1.5 Independent Contractor
1.1.6 Amendment and Change Order Process
1.1.7 Delegation of Authority (1) Must not be delegated
1.1.8 Authority of the State
1.1.9 Fulfillment of Obligations
1.1.10 Obtaining DHCS Approval
1.1.11 Certifications
1.1.12 Notices
1.1.13 Term
1.1.14 Service Area
1.1.15 Contract Extension
1.1.16 Termination
1.1.17 Phaseout Requirements
1.1.18 Indemnification
1.1.19 Sanctions
1.1.20 Liquidated Damages
1.1.21 Contractor’s Dispute Resolution Requirements
1.1.22 Inspection and Audit of Records and Facilities
1.1.23 Confidentiality of Information
1.1.24 Pilot Projects
1.1.25 Cost Avoidance and Post-Payment Recovery (PPR) of Other Health
Coverage (OHC)
[[page 639]]
Exhibit J
Page 639 of 642
1.1.26 Third-Party Tort and Workers’ Compensation Liability
1.1.27 Litigation Support
1.1.28 Equal Opportunity Employer
1.1.29 Federal and State Nondiscrimination Requirements
1.1.30 Discrimination Prohibitions
1.1.31 Small Business Participation and Disabled Veteran Business
Enterprises (DVBE) Reporting Requirements
1.1.32 Conflict of Interest Avoidance Requirements (1) Must not be delegated
1.1.33 Guaranty Provision
1.1.34 Priority of Provisions
1.1.35 Additional Incorporated Provisions – Proposals
1.1.36 Miscellaneous Provisions
1.1.37 Data Sharing
[[page 640]]
Exhibit K
Page 640 of 642
Exhibit K – Excluded Provisions as to Contractors Not Licensed Pursuant to the
Knox-Keene Health Care Service Plan Act of 1975
Unless otherwise specified in this Contract, the following provisions of the Knox-Keene
Health Care Service Plan Act of 1975, (KKA), and its implementing regulations (28
California Code of Regulations (CCR) section 1000, et seq.) are excluded from this
Contract if Contractor is not licensed to operate as a health care service plans pursuant
to the KKA. This list is not exhaustive or exclusive since other provisions of the KKA
may also be excluded from the Contract pursuant to Exhibit E, Section 1.1.D
(Applicability of the Knox-Keene Act) or other provisions of the Contract:
1. Health and Safety Code (H&S) sections 1341 – 1341.14.
2. H&S sections 1342.4 – 1342.73.
3. H&S sections 1346 – 1347.5.
4. H&S sections 1348.9 – 1348.96.
5. H&S, Article 3 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
6. H&S, Article 3.1 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
7. H&S, Article 3.15 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
8. H&S, Article 3.16 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
9. H&S, Article 3.17 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
10. H&S, Article 3.5 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
11. H&S sections 1359 – 1361.1.
12. H&S section 1363.01.
13. H&S section 1363.03.
14. H&S section 1363.05.
15. H&S, Article 4.5 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
16. H&S sections 1367.002 – 1367.009.
17. H&S section 1367.010 – 1367.012.
18. H&S section 1367.02.
19. H&S section 1367.035.
20. H&S section 1367.042.
21. H&S section 1367.07 – 1367.1
22. H&S sections 1367.45 – 1367.46.
23. H&S section 1367.15.
24. H&S section 1367.23.
25. H&S section 1367.30.
26. H&S section 1368.2
27. H&S sections 1368.04 – 1368.05.
28. H&S section 1372.
29. H&S section 1373.5.
30. H&S sections 1373.621 – 1373.622.
31. H&S section 1373.7 – 1373.8.
32. H&S section 1373.95.
33. H&S section 1373.10.
34. H&S section 1373.14.
35. H&S section 1373.18.
[[page 641]]
Exhibit K
Page 641 of 642
36. H&S section 1374.
37. H&S sections 1374.5 – 1374.58.
38. H&S sections 1374.9 – 1374.10.
39. H&S, Article 5.5 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
40. H&S, Article 5.55 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
41. H&S sections 1374.65 – 1374.721.
42. H&S sections 1374.723 – 1374.76.
43. H&S sections 1375.1 – 1375.3.
44. H&S section 1376.
45. H&S section 1377.
46. H&S sections 1379.5 – 1380.
47. H&S section 1381.
48. H&S section 1383.
49. H&S section 1385.
50. H&S, Article 6.1 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
51. H&S, Article 6.2 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
52. H&S, Article 7 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
53. H&S sections 1389.1 – 1389.7.
54. H&S, Article 8 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
55. H&S, Article 8.5 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
56. H&S sections 1395.6.H&S sections 1399.5.
57. H&S section 1399.57.
58. H&S, Article 10 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
59. H&S, Article 10.2 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
60. H&S, Article 11 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
61. H&S, Article 11.1 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
62. H&S, Article 11.5 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
63. H&S, Article 11.8 of Chapter 2.2 of Division 2.
[[page 642]]
Exhibit L
Page 642 of 642
Exhibit L – Requirements Specific to Contractor
This page intentionally left blank